1350

CeyLon ARMy COMMAND.

Lieut.-General H. E. de R. Wetherall.*
11 (Bast African) Division.

99 Indian Infantry Brigade.

Royal Marine Group, Mobile Naval Base
Defence Organization (less one A.A.
Brigade assigned to SEAC. in
Southern India).

INDIAN OCEAN BASES.

Addu Atoll Containing

Diego Garcia small

Cocos Islands garrisons.

In addition, the following troops in India
were assigned to South-East Asia Command,
being allotted later :-—

Headquarters 33 Indian Corps (Lieut.-
General M. G. N. Stopford).t

2 British Division.

19 Indian Division (Did not arrive until
October, 1944; in the interim 25 Indian
Division was substituted for it).

6 Indian Division (This consisted of two
British brigades, and of divisional troops,
some of which were Indian ; but it was called
“Indian” for deception purposes. It was
renamed 36 British Division in July, 1944,
and I shall refer to it as such throughout this
Despatch).

3 Indian Division (Cover name of Major-
General Wingate’st “Special Force”: con-
sisting of six Long-Range Penetration
Brigades; 14, 16 and 23 British Infantry
Brigades; 77 and 111 Indian Infantry
Brigades and 3 (West African) Infantry
Brigade. It contained Gurkha but no Indian
units. J shall refer to it hereafter as
“ Special Force ”).

50 Indian Tank Brigade.

3 Special Service Brigade (consisting of
No. 5 Commando and No. 44 Royal Marine
Commando).

Details showing when these “assigned”
formations were actually transferred to my
command, and allotted to Fourteenth Army,
will be given later in this Despatch.

In November, 1943, 15 Corps, consisting of
7 Indian Division and 36 Brigade of 26 Indian
Division and 81 (West African) Division (which
was just moving in), was
Arakan approximately from Teknaf to Taung
Bazaar facing 55 Japanese Division. The
enemy Division had its Headquarters in Akyab,
its 143 Regiment was on a line from Maungdaw
to Buthidaung, with 112 and 213 Regiments
disposed in depth behind this line, in reserve.

4 Corps, composed of 17 Indian Light Divi-
sion and 20 and 23 Indian Divisions, was re-
sponsible for the defence of the Imphal and
Tiddim areas of the Central front. The Light
Division (48 and 63 Indian Infantry Brigades)
was holding the Fort White—Tiddim area
against 214 and 215 Regiments of 33 Japanese

* Division, which was disposed generally along
the line of the Chindwin River as far north as
Mawlaik. 23 Indian Division was in the
Imphal Plain, and had under command 80
Indian Infantry Brigade of 20 Indian Division
which was coming forward in relief of 23
Indian Division.

* Now Lieut.-General Sir AP Edward de R.
Wetherall, K.B.E., C.B., D.S.O., M.C,

+ Now ‘General Sir Montagu GN. Stopford, G.C.B.,
K.BE., D.S.O., M.C,

t The late Major-General O, C. Wingate.

holding a line in’

SUPPLEMENT to THE LONDON GAZETTE, 19 MARCH, 1951

In the north of Burma (designated Northern
Combat Area Command—N.C.AC.) the
American-trained and equipped Chinese 22 and
38 Divisions under the command of General
Stilwell were in the general area between
Ledo and Maingkwan towards which they
were advancing. They were opposed by 18
Japanese Division, with 114 Regiment between
Myitkyina and Sumprabum, 56 Regiment
around Katha and Rail Indaw, and 55 Regi-
ment between Wuntho and Shwebo.

In no sector was there close contact but we,
and the Japanese, were patrolling to gain con-
tact; and in Arakan we were preparing for
an offensive. The Headquarters of Fourteenth
Army was at Barrackpore (later at ‘Comilla)
and of 15 Japanese Army at Maymyo.

Geography and Topography.

3. Before discussing the numerous plans
which were made and discarded for various
reasons and describing the operations which
actually took place, it is essential to appreciate
the extent to which all operations for the cap-
ture of Burma are affected by peculiar topo-
graphical and climatic conditions such as exist
in few other parts of the world.

4. The Indo-Burmese frontier, from where
it leaves the sea in Arakan, near Maungdaw,
until it joins the Sino-Thibetan frontier on the
Salween, River north of Myitkyina, follows a
series of mountain ranges, the general axes of
which run from north to south. The main
features of these mountain ranges are their
precipitous sides and the fast flowing rivers in
the deep valleys. These mountains are at their
maximum heights at the north-east end of the
frontier, where they rise to heights of ten to
twelve thousand feet and more. Their height
gradually declines as the ranges run south-
wards, though in the Naga and Chin Hills there
are many peaks of 9,000 feet, until they reach
the lesser ranges in Arakan where the maxi-
mum heights are seldom over 2,000 feet. The
main spine, however, of this range continues
southwards, parallel to the coast, towards the
mouth of the Irrawaddy and finally disappears
just north of the town of Bassein. Throughout
these ranges the hillsides are for the most part
covered with jungle so dense that it is not
possible to move without cutting paths. In
the whole length of this mountain system there
are only three roads, none of them of good
quality, over which wheels can pass. These
are the Ledo—Myitkyina road, the Dimapur—
Imphal—Tamu road and the Taungup—Prome
road, none of which has been completed to a
standard which will carry heavy traffic all the
year round.

5. East and south of this great mountain
system lies the main river basin of the
Irrawaddy with its principal tributary the
Chindwin to the west and almost parallel to it
until it joins the Irrawaddy at Myingyan. The
Irrawaddy forms a delta which begins just
north of Henzada, but the main mouth reaches
the sea just south of Rangoon. The Irrawaddy
is navigable by various craft, according to the
time of the year, as far north as Myitkyina ;
and the Chindwin can be navigated up to
Tamanthi. These two great rivers provide,
therefore, first class lines of communication
throughout the year. The valley of the
Irrawaddy and other tributary valleys provide
access for a system of railways which, starting
