SUPPLEMENT to tHe LONDON GAZETTE, 19 MARCH, 1951

38. On the 16th February, 36 British Divi-
sion began to relieve 26 Indian Division to
enable it to concentrate east of the Mayu

ange.

39. By the 20th February, the shortage of
food and ammunition, severe casualties and
lack of any tactical success began to have their
effect upon the Japanese forces, and they
began to try to escape, at first in driblets
and then in larger parties. Many of them
failed to run the gauntlet and were wiped out.
By the 24th February the Ngakyedauk Pass
had been re-opened and the Japanese offen-
sive, heralded as the beginning of the march
on Delhi, had been defeated.

40. It is convenient at this stage to examine
the enemy’s plan and analyse the cause of its
failure.

The Japanese have always supported the
doctrine that the best defence is the attack.
They proved it to their satisfaction in
Arakan in the Spring of 1943 and they confi-
dently expected to prove it again in 1944. Their
attacks have usually taken the form of an
enveloping movement combined with infiltra-
tion and frontal attacks.

These tactics achieved success in 1943, partly
owing to the lack of training of our forces and
partly owing to the fact that it was not pos-
sible, for lack of supplies, for forward troops
to hold out when their lines of communica-
tion were cut.

41. The Japanese plan was bold, typical of
their readiness to take risks, and its execution
went smoothly for the first thirty-six hours.
It then began to fail, at first slowly but with
increasing momentum until disaster overtook
it. The main reasons for this failure were: —

(@ The Japanese conviction that we
should retire if our rear was threatened, as
we had done in 1943. His whole plan was
based on this assumption. A captured direc-
tive, by the Commander of 55 Divisional
Infantry Group, ended with this significant
phrase: —“ As they have previously suffered
defeat, should a portion of the enemy waver
the whole of them will at once get confused
and victory is thus certain”.

(6) The fine fighting spirit of all ranks
who, in this the first large encounter with
the Japanese this year, showed their
superiority in jungle-fighting when well
trained and adequately equipped.

b (c) The ability to supply forward troops

yy air.

Contributory factors to its failure were our
successful use of tanks over ground much of
which was regarded as “ untankable”, the use
of medium artillery, and our continual harass-
ing from the air of the enemy’s water-borne
and road communications. The Japanese
under-estimation of their enemy and their con-
viction that they would capture large quantities
of supplies in the first few days, led them to
neglect their arrangements for the supply of
food and ammunition and their troops carried
only five days’ food. We defeated all their
attempts to bring food or ammunition forward.
In consequence, their troops soon began to
suffer from hunger and starvation and short-
age of ammunition. Their casualties amounted
to 4,500 killed and wounded out of a total of
7,000 men.

1355

The basic reason for our victory was, how-
ever, the refusal of our troops, or any portion
of them, to waver, and their unflinching
courage in exceptionally trying circumstances.

42. Mopping up in the thick mountainous
jungle was a difficult and necessarily slow
operation, and it was not until the 5th March
that we were able to resume the interrupted
course of our offensive. Razabil was captured
by 5 Indian Division on the 12th March. It
was found to be a position of great strength,
complete with underground rooms, etc. The
Tunnels position was surrounded by the 19th
March, and was finally captured by 36 British
Division some days later. Meanwhile, 7
Indian Division had taken Buthidaung and
had also captured the outer ring of the Kyaukit
defences. These defences were evacuated by
the enemy on the 23rd March and considerable
equipment fell into our hands. On the 25th,
about 500 enemy again infiltrated to the
Negakyedauk area, but were dealt with expedi-
tiously.

43. At the end of March, 25 Indian Division
began to take over from 5 Indian Division and
the latter was transferred by ‘air to 4 Corps’
front.

44. Fighting to improve our positions con-
tinued throughout April against strong opposi-
tion. As a result of successful actions by 26
Indian Division in the Buthidaung area in the
first week in May, we withdrew from Buthi-
daung, as planned, to positions more suitable
for the monsoon; forward brigades of 15
Indian Corps taking up positions on the
general line Godusara—Tunnels Area—Taung
Bazaar.

45. 36 British Division was withdrawn to
Shillong in Assam to rest and refit, with a view
to its being transferred to General Stilwell’s
command in North Burma at a later date. 7
Indian Division, two brigades moving by air,
also left Arakan in April for 4 Corps’ front.

By the end of May, therefore, we were
holding Arakan with 15 Indian Corps, com-
prising three divisions. Our monsoon disposi-
tions being: —

25 Indian Division: In the Tunnels Area,
covering the Maungdaw—Buthidaung road,
up to and including, the East Tunnel.

26 Indian Division: One brigade in the

wli—Goppe—Taung Bazaars area.

Parade at Faungbro End the third at Cox’s

Bazaar.

81 (West African) Division: Concentrating
at Chiringa.

We also had detachments on the Sangu ~
River as flank protection against a small
Japanese force which had infiltrated into that
area.

46. The term “ monsoon dispositions ” does
not imply static defence. We occupied positions
of our own choice, selected for their strength
and to preserve the health of our troops by
avoiding the worst malarial areas. The
necessity, during the monsoon in Arakan, to
evacuate certain flooded districts and take up
positions which -are defensively strong and
accessible for supplies, did not mean that every
opportunity for local offensive action was not
taken.
