SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 19 MARCH, 1951

157. The Medical Aspect—A. Organization.
(@ The medical organization in Fourteenth
Army was originally based on the assump-
tion that the main operations would be
forward of Imphal. Hospitals were conse-
quently, largely concentrated in the north and,
in order to avoid evacuation down a long line
of communication, they were sited well for-
ward. The Japanese thrust against Imphal
however, necessitated their removal, and a
situation arose in which about twenty-five per
cent. of our hospitals became temporarily non-
effective. This would have been serious had it
not been for two saving factors: firstly, air
transport provided a link between our northern
and southern lines of communication,
enabling casualties to be rapidly cleared to
hospitals serving the Arakan Front; and
secondly, the sick rate on both fronts fell far
short of the estimate for which provision had
been made.

(6) In the south, where extensive operations
had not been originally contemplated, and
where the forces engaged were smaller, our
hospitals had not been concentrated so far
forward.

Considerable discussion took place early in
the year between 11 Army Group and Gencral
Headquarters, India, regarding the adequacy
or otherwise of the hospitals.

The decisions then taken proved to be sound
on the whole, in spite of our forecasts being
wrong and of radical alterations in the lines of
evacuation. Although there is still a decided
shortage of medical officers, and a recrious
shortage of nurses and nursing personnel, there
has been no general shortagé of hospital
accommodation, but anxiety is always present
in an unhealthy tropical theatre of war.

158. At the beginning of the year, facilities
for evacuation were reviewed, and as a result
of representations made by me to the Supreme
Allied Commander, six hospital ships were
allotted to Fourteenth Army.

Further, a co-ordinating committee, invested
with executive authority, which includes repre-
sentatives of 11 Army Group and General
Headquarters, India, and of the many services
affected, has been set up to deal in detail with
the complicated problem of medical evacua-
tion. Its measures have so far proved effec-
tive, notwithstanding the many problems which
have arisen.

159. One interesting feature of the recent
fighting is that the medical units have found
themselves on occasions called upon to under-
take part of the responsibility for their own
defence. That medical personnel had to fight
proved to be a necessity—it was not a question
as to whether they should defend themselves,
but how best they could do so.

160. (@ The complicated problem of
medical evacuation from Arakan involved
the use of almost every conceivable form of
transport. Hand carriages, mules, jeeps, ambu-
lances, D.U.K.Ws., sampans, flats, paddle
steamers, hospital ships, ambulance trains, and
light and heavy aircraft have all had to be
employed over one stage or another of the
journey.

(6) To and from 81 (West African) Division
operating in the Kaladan Valley, medical

1369

supply and evacuation has had to be entirely
by air. That the arrangements worked
smoothly is due both to the medical officers
concerned and to the skilful co-operation of
the R.A.F.

(c) I have already mentioned how the evacu-
ation of casualties by air from the Imphal
Front prevented a serious situation developing
when certain hospitals had to be closed down.
This air evacuation continued throughout the
operations about Imphal and was instrumental
in saving many lives. In addition to casualties,
two large General Hospitals were flown out
with all their valuable equipment.

(@) The total number of casualties evacuated
by air during the first half of 1944, from all
fronts, was over 24,000. Rapid and adequate
air transport facilities abolish at one stroke
the unsatisfactory and difficult clearance of
casualties down long surface lines of com-
munication, with all their attendant disadvan-
tages. This method of moving the wounded
has a most beneficial effect on the morale of
the fighting soldier.

161. The Medical Aspect—B. Sick Rate.
The most satisfactory feature on the medical
side has been the surprisingly low sick rate
during the first six months of the year. The
expected rise to 5 or 6 per 1,000 per diem has
not happened and the rate in May was as low
as 3.1 per 1,000 including battle casualties.
This is an almost incredibly low figure com-
pared with that for 1943, which was 6 per
1,000 per diem ; and, in spite of the seasonal
i ae of malaria, it has since dropped to
2.9.

Since November 1943, food supply greatly
improved, and more fresh meat, fruit and vege-
tables became available. It is probable that
this improvement in rations has been a major
cause in keeping down the sick rate.

162. The most serious menace we have to
face, where disease is concerned, is of course
malaria, and this can only be overcome by
unremitting effort and vigilance. The malaria
rate, up till the end of June, has remained con-
sistently low compared with last year. This is
remarkable, since operations have been
carried out on a greatly extended scale, and
many more troops have been exposed to the
tisk of infection. If the same rate had obtained
in Arakan and at Imphal from March to June
as in the same months of 1943, the effect on
operations would have been serious.

I attribute this satisfactory state of affairs
to four factors—firstly, better anti-malarial dis-
cipline ; secondly, the improved anti-malarial
organization which, under medical control and
aided by the engineers, has freed certain areas
from the mosquito ; thirdly, the ample flow of
anti-malarial supplies of all kinds; and last,
but not least, improved morale, since troops
in good fettle look after themselves better in
every way than when they are depressed.

The efficacy of D.D.T. as an anti-mosquito
spray is shortly being tested in the Kabaw
Valley.

163. The Medical Aspect—C. Miscellaneous
Medical Points. (a) There has been no notice-
able change in the physical standard of British
reinforcements, which can only be classed as
average. .
