“1354

had to be delayed until the enemy attack had
been defeated. This took some four weeks,
but when it was finished the attack on our
original objectives was continued.

29. This Japanese counter-attack merits
attention, both on account of the boldness of
its conception and also on account of the firm
stand made by 7 Indian Division which was
surrounded and attacked from all sides. The
Division was supplied by air and thus did
not have to metire when its lines of com-
munication were cut. This was the main cause
of the defeat of the Japanese counter-attack.

30. In the last week of January, identifica-
tion of a fresh enemy regiment was obtained.
On the Ist February, documents ordering the
J..Fs. (Indians fighting for the Japanese) to
concentrate east of the Mayu Range at once for
an operation were captured. I was in Four-
teenth Army area at that time and discussed
the position with the Army Commander. We
concluded that ‘these moves indicated a
counter-attack by the Japanese, but were un-
able to decide upon the exact form it was
likely to take, though it seemed probable that
an attempt to outflank 15 Indian Corps was
the most probable. We agreed that if 5 and 7
Indian Divisions held their positions against a
frontal attack, while at the same time pre-
paring an all-round defence to meet attacks
from the flank or rear, it would be possible to
destroy any Japanese outflanking detachment
with the reserves. I placed 36 British Division,
which had arrived at Chittagong for another
operation, at General Slim’s disposal and he
ordered one brigade of this Division, together
with 26 Indian Division, which was in Four-
teenth Army reserve in the Comilla area, to
move south at once. He ordered all forma-
tions in the forward areas to hold their ground.
He made arrangements for the packing for air
transport of three days’ rations, ammunition
and medical stores and with the R.AF. for
their delivery by air to 7 Indian Division, if
called for. These preparations had a far-
reaching effect on the battle.

bea ne the enemy's blow actually fell on
the el » it so happen at prepara-
tions for transferring our offensive from the
west to the east of the Mayu Range were in
progress. One infantry brigade of 5 Indian
Division had moved over to the east of the
tange to free one brigade of 7 Indian Division
for this operation ; thus 15 Indian Corps had
available at that time a reserve infantry brigade
and a tank regiment east of the range, which
was the flank menaced by the Japanese threat.

32. The Japanese plan, captured early in
the battle, was to pass through and round the
left flank of 7 Indian Division, take Taung
Bazaar from the east, and cut the Bawli
Bazaar—Razabil road. This move completed,
the Japanese intended to attack 7 Indian
Division from the rear and drive it through the
Ngakyedauk Pass. This would isolate 5 Indian
Division which would in turn be mopped up

and the remnants driven over the Naf River.:

So certain were they of success, that the Tokyo
radio announced victories at the appropriate
times, according to their pre-arranged time-
table, regardless that this time-table bore no
relation to the facts.

33. The attack against 7 Indian Division began
with the appearance in rear of its left flank

SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 19 MARCH, 1951

at Taung Bazaar of an enemy regiment, with
elements from two others, which had passed
partly round our left flank through the jungle
and partly through the positions held by 114
Brigade. Almost simultaneously, strong fron-
tal attacks were made by two regiments in the
area north and north-west of Buthidaung. A
brigade of 7 Indian Division, which had been
relieved by 5 Indian Division, but had not yet
been committed to their new task, was sent
north to check the enemy advance south-
wards from Taung Bazaar. In this it partially
succeeded, but, owing to the closeness of the
country and the enemy’s numerical superiority,
was outflanked by a party of the enemy which
overran the Headquarters of 7 Indian Division
in the early morning. The Divisional Com- |
mander, however, regained control of the
operations that evening. Brigades and divi-
sional troops had been ordered to prepare
positions capable of all round defence as soon
as the enemy’s presence in Taung Bazaar had
been discovered. 9, 33 and 114 Brigades,
therefore, dug in on their positions, while
another defended area which contained Divi-
sional H.Q., part of 89 Brigade and Divisional
Troops was hastily .prepared in the area of
Awlanbyin and Sinzweya. These areas were
called “ boxes ” during the battle.

34. The enemy cut the Ngakyedauk Pass
and closely invested these boxes. One
Japanese battalion also crossed by the
Maunghnama Pass further north and began
to harass 15 Indian Corps Headquarters and
the rear of 5 Indian, Division from a position
in the hills on the east of the road. But they
made no further headway, although on the 9th
February the situation in 7 Indian Division’s
defended area (Sinzweya) was difficult and con-
tinued so for several days. 26 Indian Division,
which had been moved up to Bawli Bazaar
by 15 Indian Corps, now began to make its
presence felt, but it was evident that its opera-
tions, in conjunction with those of 5 Indian
Division from the west to clear the Ngakye-
dauk Pass, would take time.

35. Supply dropping to the various boxes
began on the 9th February, and an airstrip for
the evacuation of casualties was ready by the
12th at Taung Bazaar, which had by then
been cleared of the enemy.

36. In spite of continuous attacks, supported
by the fire of 150-mm guns and by fighter
bombers, the enemy were unable to reduce any
of our strongholds. On the 12th the Com-
mander, 7 Indian Division issued orders to take
the offensive to prevent any further hostile
infiltration and the escape of any enemy
already in his rear. The enemy was now “in
the bag” and it was the task of 7 Indian
Division to keep him there until destroyed.

37. Severe fighting continued with the
Japanese trying to stem the advance of 26 and
5 Indian Divisions and overcome what their
orders described as “the hysterical defence ”
of the areas of 7 Indian Division. Hysterical
or not, it may one day be called historical as
it was the first successful réply to Japanese
large-scale infiltration tactics in jungle country.
The bitterness of the fighting is illustrated by
the remark made by a veteran of Dunkirk.
who spent two days on the beaches ; he stated
he would willingly have spent a fortnight at
Dunkirk if he could have been let off with
two days in 7 Indian Divisional defended area.
