SUPPLEMENT to rae LONDON GAZETTE, 19 MARCH, 1951

is provided by the rail link between Lum-

ding and Badarpur, but the capacity of this

link is limited owing to the gradients.

(© The Arakan Line of Communication,
which supplies 15 Indian Corps southwards
from Chittagong.

The following paragraphs give a brief general
description of these lines of communication,
the difficulties which have been encountered
and the measures taken to overcome them.

177. The Assam Line of Communication.
This line of communication has four main
Toutes :—

@ The metre gauge rail route from
Mokameh Ghat* to Amingaon, across the
Brahmaputra by wagon ferry, and onwards
to Dimapur and the American bases in the
Ledo area. Stores arrive at Mokameh Ghat
by broad gauge railway from depots in
Northern and Central India.

(6) The broad gauge route from Calcutta
to river ghats on the lower Brahmaputra and
to transhipment stations of the metre gauge
route. The stores carried come from the
Calcutta Base Area and from Southern and
Western India. .

© The river route. This includes an all
water route up the Brahmaputra from
Calcutta and, also, lifts between intermediate
rail-served ghats on the Ganges and Brahma-
putra.

(d) A road, known as the Assam access
road, from Siliguri where it connects with
the broad gauge railway, to Bongaigaon on
the metre gauge route.

The control of the Assam line of communi-
cation rests with General Headquarters, India.

178. Communications in Assam are compli-

cated and rendered unreliable, by both operat--

ing and physical difficulties. The operating
difficulties are due to the fact that a far greater
load has been imposed on the railway ‘than
could be handled by the normal civil organiza-
tion. The physical difficulties are due to the
seasonal liability of both road and rail com-
munications to serious flooding, and also to
the vagaries of the Brahmaputra. At some
places, sudden rises in the river will wash away
ghats, with all their connected installations,
completely ; while at others, sand banks will
form and render them unapproachable by river
craft.

The operating difficulties have been over-
come to a great extent by the employment of
military transportation units to assist the civil
staff. The control of a considerable section
of the metre gauge main line has been taken
over by the United States Transportation Corps
which has resulted in a great increase in
traffic. The physical difficulties are being met
by the provision, where possible, of alternative
means of communication.

179. Very extensive measures have been, and
are being, taken to improve the capacity of this
line of communication. They include the
doubling of certain sections on both the broad
and metre gauge lines, the conversion of one
section from narrow gauge to metre gauge,
the construction of additional ghats and ferries,
the improvement of existing facilities, and the
provision of more river craft.

* “Ghat” means a landing stage.

1371

A proposal to erect a railway bridge across
the Brahmaputra at Amingaon was rejected on
the grounds that it would take too long to build.
The alternative was to increase the capacity
of the Amingaon—Pandu ferry, and this has
been done.

180. The Eastern Bengal Line of Communi
cation. This line consists of three main
Toutes : —~

(@) The sea route from Calcutta and Viza-
gapatam to Chittagong.

(6) From the Calcutta area to the Eastern
Bengal metre gauge railway system, either
by rail (via the Tistamukh wagon ferry), or
by inland water transport, or by a combina-
tion of both. This railway system converges
on Akhaura, and from there divides into two
branches. The northern branch serves the
Surma Valley airfields joining up with
the Assam line of communication across the
hill section of the railway between Badarpur
and Lumding, and the southern supplies the
Chittagong area. ;

(c) The road running south from the
Assam trunk road, through Shillong, Sylhet
and Comilla, to Chittagong.

181. The difficulties encountered on this line
of communication are, as regards the rail-
ways:—

(@) The Eastern Bengal system is unable
adequately to cope with the increased lift to
airfields used for air supply.

(6) The capacity of the hill rail link be-
tween Badarpur and Lumding, which is
limited to only nine trains a day each way,
with a nett load of 140 tons each.

182. The principal developments of the
railways in Eastern Bengal have been made
with a view to providing a supplementary rail
route for the Assam line of communication.
These include :—

@ The provision of additional crossing
stations between the wagon ferry terminal
at Bahadurabad and Badapur.

G@) Re-laying the hill section between

- Badarpur and Lumding to permit of the use
of more powerful locomotives and longer
trains.

In June, an investigation was carried out
by representatives of 11 Army Group ; General
Headquarters, India; Headquarters, Supreme
Allied Commander, South-East Asia Com-
mand; and the United States forces. Their
recommendations, which are already being
adopted, will increase line and terminal capa-
city throughout the whole system.

183. Chittagong Port. The limited capacity
of this port originally restricted the use of the
direct sea route, but steady increase has been
obtained by improving the railway serving the
wharves, providing additional moorings and
jetties, building more storage accommodation,
re-erecting equipment dismantled and removed
under the denial scheme and by the supply of
more lighters.

The working of the port has also improved
as a result of its reorganization when Four-
teenth Army assumed control on the Ist
February.

The stores imported have increased by 150
per cent. since November 1943.
