SUPPLEMENT to tue LONDON GAZETTE, 19 MARCH, 1951

be commensurate with the expenditure in man-
power and material which had been employed.
These operations :—

(a) Did not affect the launching of the
Japanese offensive against Assam.

(6) Had but little effect on the enemy’s
lines of communication to Assam. They
delayed for one month up to three batta-
lions of 15 Japanese Division, which might
otherwise have reached the Imphal Front
earlier.

(c) Although they severed the rail com-
munications of 18 Japanese Division for
about three months, only one battalion (from
the 18 Divisional Reserve) was actually
diverted from the front of General Stilwell’s
forces and that only for about a month.

(@ On the other hand, the Japanese were
compelled to collect troops to meet the
threat but they did not amount to more than
twelve battalions at any one time, although
the number of enemy battalions which were
employed at one time or another added up
to sixteen. The concentration of twelve
battalions was not complete until two months
after the original landings,

115. 16 L.R.P. Brigade, which had originally
marched in from Ledo, was evacuated by air
early in May. On the 17th May, the three
remaining brigades of Special Force came
under the command of General Stilwell in the
Northern Combat Area Command and subse-
quently operated, in a normal infantry réle,
in the Kamaing—Mogaung—Myitkyina sector.

“Dahforce”, which was composed of Kachin
Levies, was flown in with Special Force and
later amalgamated with three columns of 111
Brigade, the whole being re-named “ Morris-
ior ” {already briefly mentioned in paragraph

Before leaving the subject of Special Force,
I wish to pay tribute to its gallant commander,
Major-General Wingate, whose death occurred
in a flying accident late in March. He was that
rare combination of the dreamer and the man
of action and his example and spirit will remain
an inspiration to the men he trained. He was
succeeded by his Second-in-Command, Major-
General W. D. A. Lentaigne, CB, CBE,

Lessons of the Campaign.

116. The following important facts emerge
from a study of the operations undertaken
during the first six months of 1944:—

. (@) The reinforcements received were well
trained, thanks to the training arrangements
made by the Commander-in-Chief, India,
and our troops, both individually and collec-
tively, were able to engage the Japanese
with confidence.

(6) Our ability to make full use of air
supply by virtue of our air superiority has
fundamentally altered the tactical picture,
and enabled our troops not only to operate
in country hitherto considered impassable
and so attack the enemy, but also to hold
positions when the enemy has cut their
lines of communication.

(©) The operations have shown that ordin-
ary formations can be transported quickly
by air. They have also shown the need, for
fighting under Far Eastern conditions, of a
* Standard Infantry Division ” which can be
readily transported by rail, sea, M.T. or air.

1363

(@) The urgent need for plenty of infantry
in this theatre of war has again been
emphasised. All divisions, except 19 Indian
Division which was the only reserve at the
disposal of the Commander-in-Chief, India,
were engaged in the course of the fighting
and no proper relief of formations was pos-
sible. The relief of tired troops is most
important and it was not solved satisfactorily
owing to shortage of troops.

Some of my divisions had, by last June, been
in the forward areas for twenty-eight months.
I need not stress the mental and physical strain
which jungle warfare, under adverse climatic
conditions, imposes on the soldier.

Naval Operations.

117. I wish to acknowledge the assistance
given by coastal forces in the Arakan opera-
tions, which carried out valuable raids against
vulnerable points on the coast, and were pro-
tection against possible small sea-borne raids
by the enemy.

In March, 3 Commando Brigade (No. 5
Commando and No. 44 Royal Marine Com-
mando) carried out successfully a small am-
phibious operation in the Alethangyaw area
from St. Martin’s Island, with the object of
containing the enemy in that area and prevent-
ing the movement north of reinforcements
during our main attack on the Maungdaw—
Buthidaung road.

Although there was no large-scale naval
activity in conjunction with land forces dur-
ing the’ period under review, it was the ever
present threat of amphibious operations which
tied nearly two Japanese divisions to coastal
areas.

Air Co-operation.

118. Tasks. The general tasks performed by
Eastern Air Command during the first six
months of the year were as follows: —

(@ Strategic air offensive to destroy
enemy forces, transportation, and mainten-
ance installations.

(b) Support of Fourteenth Army opera-
tions.

(c) Air defence of Calcutta and the
adjacent industrial areas and, also, of the
airfields used by the American Air Trans-
port Command in North-East Assam for the
China ferry service.

@) Air transportation for airborne and air
transit forces.

(e) Photographic reconnaissance.

119. Strategic Air Force. 1 am, of course,
chiefly concerned with the air transport and
tactical support given to Fourteenth Army,
but I wish to acknowledge the assistance ren-
dered by the Strategic Air Force. Their attacks
on Rangoon and Bangkok, and, also, those on
Saigon by 14 U.S.A.AF. from China, have
greatly impeded the flow of Japanese reinforce-
ments and material into Burma. In fact, up till
the time when monsoon conditions reduced air
activity, Rangoon was practically denied to the
enemy as a port. Operations against enemy-
held ports have been supplemented by constant
attacks against coastal shipping and, most im-
portant from my point of view, against rail
communications and military installations. On
