SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 19 MARCH, 1951

had only reached a point ten miles south of
Palel, though it was all-weather one-way for
a good many miles south of that point, when
the enemy launched their March offensive.

20. Concurrently with planning for opera-
tions on the Imphal Front, planning for opera-
tions in Arakan was, of course, in progress.
Several plans, which included amphibious
operations against Akyab in conjunction with
an advance down the Mayu Peninsula, were
examined, but all were eventually abandoned
either for lack of resources or for other reasons,
and I was thrown back on a plan for an ad-
vance with the limited objective of the Maung-
daw—Buthidaung road, and the mouth of the
Naf River. Once the latter was captured,
supplies could be brought in by sea, not only
to Maungdaw but also to Teknaf.

21. Other plans for amphibious operations,
among them one for the capture of the
Andamans, were also examined, but all were
in the end rejected as the resources for them
were needed for more important operations
in other theatres of war. .

I was finally compelled, therefore, to limit
the operations of the Army to a short advance
in Arakan and advances down the Tiddim road
and Kabaw Valley with the object of captur-
ing the Kalewa—Kalemyo area.

Part II—OPERATIONS.
Operations by 15 Indian Corps in Arakan.

22. In November, 1943, we were in contact
with the Japanese in Arakan, the Imphal Front
and in North Burma (N.C.A.C.).

The situation in Arakan at the end of the
monsoon of 1943, was that we held positions
covering Cox’s Bazaar with 26 Indian Division
on the general line Teknaf—Taung Bazaar,
while the enemy held the Maungdaw—
Buthidaung road. The advance to close con-
tact started in the middle of October.

23. Between Ocfober and the end of
December other changes were made in our dis-
positions :—

(a) 26 Indian Division was relieved by 7
and 5 Indian Divisions.

(6) 7 Indian Division moved across the
Mayu Range, complete with all its guns and
lorries. A fair-weather road was built over
the Ngakyedauk Pass, which lies north-west
of the village of that name, to provide the
Necessary communications.

(© 5 Indian Division took over the
western sector of the front.

(@ Our rear areas were re-adjusted.

(©) Finally we drove in the enemy’s out-
post line.

At the end of December, 5 Indian Division
held from the sea to the crest of the Mayu
Range, while 7 Indian Division had moved
over complete into the Kalapanzin Valley. The
stage was set for an attack on the main enemy
position. ;

24, Early in January, I issued an Opera-
tional Instruction to the Commander,
Fourteenth Army, Lieut.-General W. J. Slim,
directing him to secure the mouth of the Naf
River; Maungdaw—Buthidaung ; and exploit
success to the maximum. These instructions
were based on an Operational Directive issued

1353

by the Supreme Allied Commander. My
objects were, first, to improve our general
situation in Arakan, and, second, to contain
and destroy Japanese forces.

25. A period during which certain sub-
sidiary operations were undertaken to secure
the necessary jumping-off places for our offen-
sive then followed. The enemy defended these
positions stubboraly.

On the 15th January, the dispositions of
the forward elements of 15 Indian Corps
(Lieut.-General A. F. P. Christison), were as
follows :— .

5 Indian Division: Maungdaw—Magyi
Chaung—Rehkat Chaung—Point 1619, with
a brigade in reserve west of the Mayu
Range.

7 Indian Division: One brigade in the
hills north and north-east of Htindaw. One
brigade Tatmakhali to Sinohbyin, with for-
ward troops on the Letwedet Chaung. One
brigade Kyaukit massif—Pyinshe—Windwin,
with a detachment on the Saingdin Chaung.

81 (West African) Division: Daletme—
Satpaung area, in the Kaladan Valley.

Tanks: One regiment, in support of 5
Indian Division.

Medium Artillery: One battery in sup-
port of each division.

26. The enemy had turned the area about
the Tunnels, through which the road runs in
its passage through the highest portion of the
Mayu Range between Maungdaw and
Buthidaung, into a fortress with two strong
buttresses—Razabil on the west and Letwedet
on the east.

The general plan of attack was framed to
capture these two buttresses in turn and sur-
round the garrison of the Tunnels fortress.
5 Indian Division was to take Razabil and
7 Indian Division Buthidaung, thus cutting in
behind the Letwedet buttress. 81 (West
African) Division was to advance down the
Kaladan River to capture Kyauktaw, with
the ultimate object of cutting the Kanzauk—-
Htizwe road, which was the enemy’s main
lateral line of communication between the
Kaladan and Kalapanzin Valleys.

27. The main offensive was launched on the
19th January, and, despite strong opposition,
our preliminary operations against the enemy’s
outposts were very successful. The original
plan had included a sea landing by 2 British
Division further south down the Mayu Penin-
sula. As we did not wish to drive the Japanese
into the toe of the Peninsula until 2 British
Division had effected a firm lodgement, our
attack on the main enemy positions was de-
ferred to synchronize with the sea landing, the
date of which could not be put forward as it
was governed by the state of the tide and
moon. Unfortunately, the craft required for
the amphibious operation were taken away
and, therefore, this “right hook” had to be
cancelled. Thus our Jang offensive had been
held up to no jose. By the ebruary,
however, the attack on Razabil had achieved
a measure of success, but the main position
stili held out. Progress elsewhere had been
steady, but slow.

28. It was at this moment that the enemy
launched his counter-attack and our offensive
