1356

Results of the Arakan Campaign.

47. As already mentioned (paragraph 24),
the objects of the Arakan campaign were to
improve our general situation and engage and
destroy Japanese forces. Our success had led
me to hope that we could clear the whole of
the Mayu Peninsula, but the need for providing
reinforcements (5 and 7 Indian Divisions) for
the Imphal Front frustrated this.

Although this further advance was not
possible, the objects of the campaign had been

“generally achieved. Maungdaw had been

firmly established as a base ; the Mayu Range,
including the important Tunnels area, together
with the eastern foothills, was firmly in our
hands ; and the lateral road was in daily use.

55 Japanese Division, despite reinforcements,
had been outfought and was weak and tired.
In spite of the reduction in the strength of 15
Indian Corps by three divisions (the Sth, 7th
and 36th), operations after their withdrawal
went according to plan. To sum up, the Japan-
ese offensive, from which they confidently ex-
pected great results, had been defeated, and
we had captured our objectives. Last, but not
Teast, we had established a moral ascendency
eer the enemy which promised well for the
‘uture.

Operations in the Kaladan Valley.

48. The Japanese threatened our left flank
during the previous year’s operations by ad-
vancing up the Kaladan River, and I was deter-
mined that this should not happen again. 81
(West African) Division was, in consequence,
moved across into the Kaladan Valley to pro-
tect the left flank of 15 Indian Corps.

Our ability to supply troops by air made it

possible for a division to operate down this

valley, but the physical difficulties of moving
into the valley were great. A jeep track 73
miles long had to be built from Chitinga to
Daletme across four mountain ranges. It was
begun on the 18th November and finished on
the 17th January—an engineering feat which
teflected the greatest credit on all ranks.

49. 81 (West African) Division concentrated
in the Satpaung—Daletme area in January and
started its move down the Kaladan at the end
of that month. They captured Kyauktaw by
the 3rd March and were then advancing on
Apaukwa when a strong Japanese counter-
attack developed from the south-east. The ad-
vance had to be stopped in order to meet it.
The enemy captured our position near
Kyauktaw and the Division withdrew to
positions south of Kaladan Village. There-
after, it continued its réle of flank protection
in the Paletwa area,

50. In April, this Division (less one battalion
left at Paletwa, where it was joined by two
battalions of Indian troops, one of which was
withdrawn later) was moved westwards across
ithe Arakan Yomas to the east of the
Kalapanzin River, to provide closer protection
to the left flank of 15 Indian Corps. Subse-
quently, it was withdrawn via Buthidaung—
Taung Bazaar to the neighbourhood of
Chiringa.

51. The battalion left in the Kaladan was

‘later reinforced by Headquarters 6 (West

African) Brigade and another battalion. One
Indian battalion also remained in the area.
The réle of this force was to frustrate attempts

SUPPLEMENT to THE LONDON GAZETTE, 19 MARCH, 1951

which the Japanese were making to in-
filtrate across the hills into the Sangu Valley.
It was later withdrawn into this valley and, in
June, was providing detachments along the
Sangu River, which were successful in driving
back, with considerable losses, small enemy
forces which had penetrated this area.

The Chin Hills.

52. The link between Arakan and the Imphal
Front is the Chin Hills ; the strategic import-
ance of which lies in the fact that it covers
the approaches to Chittagong and Aijal, via
Lungleh. It also flanks the Japanese lines of
communication through Gangaw to Kalemyo.

53. The Chin Hills and the Lushai Hills
lying west of them, were garrisoned by two
detachments of Levies, each with a stiffening
of one regular battalion; Headquarters being
at Aijal. The réle of these detachments was
to interrupt the enemy’s communications and
to hamper his movements in the area Aijal—
Champai—Falam—Haka. Early in November
1943, however, just before the assumption of
command by Admiral The Lord Louis Mount-
batten, the enemy advancing in some strength,
had, though they suffered severe casualties in
gaining these minor successes, driven our
Irregulars out of Falam and Haka and caused
our regular troops to withdraw from Fort

ite.

54. Early in April, another battalion was
added to the Chin Hills detachment, which then
became the Lushai Brigade. This force has
performed its task very satisfactorily, laying
ambushes, obtaining information, and inflicting
considerable losses. It was reinforced by an
additional battalion in June, and ordered to
interfere with the Japanese communications
along the Imphal—Tiddim road.

The Chindwin.

55. 4Corps(Lieut.-General G. A. P. Scoones),
with Headquarters at Imphal, had been respon-
sible for the defence of the Indian frontier east
and south of Manipur since 1942. The area
for which the Corps was responsible extended
from its boundary with Northern Combat Area
Command (N.C.A.C.) on the line Mawlu—
Taro—Wakching (40 miles east of Jorhat)
down to and inclusive of the Chin Hills. In
November 1943, 23 Indian Division had its
Headquarters at Tamu, and 17 Indian Light
Division with its Headquarters was on the
Imphal—Tiddim road at Milestone 102. 20
Indian Division, with its Headquarters at
Shenam, about 10 miles south-east of Palel,
was engaged in patrolling across the Chindwin.
At the end of December the whole of this Divi-
sion had been concentrated in the Tamu area,
its Headquarters having moved forward to
Sibong. This Division relieved 23 Indian Divi-
sion which was withdrawn from the Imphal
Plain for rest and training ; having been in the
forward area without relief since June 1942.

56. The task which I had allotted Fourteenth
Army on this sector of the front was to carry
out offensive operations with the objects of:—

(@ Clearing the Chin Hills as far as the
foothills south-east of Tiddim. -

(b) Dominating the area between the Yu
and Chindwin Rivers, south of the Tamu—

Sittaung road.
