SUPPLEMENT to ton LONDON GAZETTE, 19 MARCH, 1951

resources, it was not practical to have a pum-
ber of specialised formations such as Airborne,
Assault, Armoured, Light, M.T., and Animal
and M.T. Divisions. Such a policy was not
only uneconomical, but circumstances inevi-
tably forced their use sooner or later in réles
for which they had not been trained or
organized.

Early in May, I recommended to the
Supreme Allied Commander that the policy of
having a Standard Division should be accepted,
such a division to be capable of fulfilling all
the réles which it might be called upon to
perform within South-East Asia Command,
viZ.2—

@ Normal jungle fighting.

(6) Operations involving transportation
by air.

(©) Amphibious operations (though, for
this réle, special training and the attachment
of certain special units such as beach groups,
would of course be necessary).

The Supreme Allied Commander gave his
approval to my proposals and they have since
been accepted by the War Office and General
Headquarters, India. In addition the forma-
tion of an airborne division has been agreed
0. ‘

Action to put this new policy into force is
being taken in order to bring the maximum
number of divisions on to the standard organi-
zation before the end of 1944. This organiza-
tion will include three infantry battalions per
brigade (to be increased to four when practic-
able, as is the case in the War Office Light-
Scale Division for Far Eastern Theatres), two
artillery regiments of 25-pounders (in place of
the existing one 25-pounder and one jungle
field regiment in A. and M.T. divisions),
one 3.7-inch howitzer mountain regiment of
three batteries (instead of the present four-
battery regiment), and one anti-tank regi-
ment having an alternative armament of 3-inch
mortars (instead of the existing anti-aircraft
cum anti-tank regiment). The division will
also include a reconnaissance battalion
organized on similar lines to the normal infan-
try battalion, but with extra signal equipment,
and, as soon as the manpower situation per-
mits, a medium machine gun battalion.

A major feature of the new Standard
Division is the reduction in the number of
lorries, both in unit Ist line transport and in
2nd line M.T. companies, and the introduction
of a large number of jeeps. Eventually it is
hoped to have two types of vehicles only ; the
jeep and the 3-ton four-wheel-drive lorry
(apart, of course, from a limited number of
specialist vehicles).

143. Re-organization of Armoured Forma-
tions. A review of the réle required of tank
brigades operating in this Theatre led me to
the conclusion that certain major changes in
their organization were necessary. I considered
that the value of these brigades would be
greatly enhanced if (@) all regiments were re-
equipped with medium tanks, (6) a troop of
flame-thrower tanks was included in each
squadron, and (c) an infantry battalion was
included in each brigade. By making certain
reductions in the existing establishment, it
would, I decided, be possible to adopt this
re-organization of the armoured units, while

B2

1367

at the same time, effecting a saving in man-
power.

This matter is still being discussed with the
Commander-in-Chief, India, and will be re-
ferred to again in my next Despatch.*

144. Organization for. the Movement and
Maintenance of Air Transported Formations.
Recent experience has shown that there is an
urgent need for a permanent organization to
handle the movement and maintenance of
forces by air, instead of the improvisation that
has hitherto existed.

Such an organization must, obviously, be de-
signed to ensure the closest co-operation be-
tween the staffs at the headquarters of the air
force and the army concerned and, also, the
staffs at the airfields affected. To achieve this,
four elements are required :—

@ An Amny Link with the R.A.F. Head-
quarters dealing with air transport.

(6) Joint Army and R.AF. Air Despatch
and Delivery Units at airfields.

(c) An Airfield Maintenance Organization
to ensure that maintenance requirements at
airfields are met.

@ Air Supply and Maintenance Com-
panies to deal with the packing, loading and
ejection of supplies.

My proposals for an organization, which
will produce the necessary continuity and flexi-
bility, are under consideration by Head-
quarters, Air Command, S.E.A.C., and General
Headquarters, India.

145. Assumption of Full Control by 11
Army Group. As I have already stated in
the opening paragraphs of this Despatch, Four-
teenth Army, together with Ceylon Army Com-
mand and the Indian Ocean bases of Addu
Atoll, Diego Garcia and Cocos, came under
my command from the 16th November 1943,
but certain administrative matters continued
to be dealt with by General Headquarters,
India, until more staff became available for
11 Army Group. My Headquarters, however,
assumed full control with effect from the
Ist May, 1944, with the exception of some
administrative matters which were more con-
veniently handled by G-H.Q. India.

Part [IV—ApDMINISTRATION.

146. In order to view the administrative
problem which confronted us in this Theatre
in its correct perspective, it is necessary to
understand the background against which the
present organization developed. Eastern
Army, the forerunner of Fourteenth Army,
came into being at a time of reverses in Burma
and unpreparedness in Eastern India. The
whole of that rear organization, on which the
success or failure of an army depends, had
therefore to be built up from nothing, under
the most difficult conditions. While the early
stages of this build-up have already been
described in Despatches from the India Com-
mand, a brief recapitulation of the facts may
be opportune here.

147. Our strategy, in 1942, was defensive and
our advanced bases were selected accordingly.
The area of operations was, and still is, divided

administratively into two fronts—Arakan and

* Operations in Assam and Burma from 23rd June,
1944 to 12th November, 1944. :
