1368

Assam—each of which is served by a separate
line of communication, connected by poor
lateral communications (though air supply is
now an important factor which can be, and
has been, used to unite these separate lines).

The natural advanced base for the Arakan
front is Chittagong. This port was prepared
for demolition in 1942 and many “denial”
measures were actually carried out. It only
narrowly escaped being occupied by the
Japanese in the summer of that year; and in
fact, our subsequent advance in October 1942,
when we passed from the defensive to the
offensive, began while Chittagong was still
under sentence of death. Both the port and
advanced base at Chittagong had then to be
developed while active operations were in pro-
gress, and while they were both having to
perform their administrative functions to the
forces in the field. These forces rose to a
strength of two divisions, and, incidentally, had
a sick rate of over 6 per 1,000 per diem. Not
only was there no all-weather road in Arakan,
but no road at all worthy of the name. We
were, therefore, compelled to rely largely on
coastal shipping and inland water transport
and, for many months, there was a serious
shortage of both types of vessels. The diffi-
culty was eventually overcome to some extent
by the construction of a road which had to be
surfaced with bricks, the coal for which had
to be imported from India. Ordinary metalling
was impossible, owing to the absence of stone.

148. While we were on the defensive, Mymen-
singh was being prepared as an advanced base,
but was only about half finished when our
strategy changed. We were not sufficiently
certain of success to discontinye construction
and, in the light of subsequent events, it is
fortunate that we continued to build.

149. On the Imphal Front, we had to con-
struct a large advanced base in virgin jungle,
under the most adverse climatic and weather
conditions. This base at Manipur Road, or
Dimapur as it is sometimes called, had to
start work while its construction was yet in-
complete. .

As a site for a base, Dimapur possessed
almost every conceivable disadvantage: heavy
rainfall ; unhealthy climate ; and uneven ground
(which did not become apparent until the dense
jungle had been cleared). Moreover, it lies on
a narrow tongue of land between two rivers,
both of which are liable to overflow during the
monsoon. To these local topographical dis-
advantages must be added the further one of
the liability to interruption of the railway to
Assam by the rivers and streams which pour
down from the huge catchment area of the
Himalayas, the foothills of which the railway
skirts. In.1942, the railway was cut by floods
from the 24th June till the 30th November.

150. The railway system, which is metre
gauge, had never previously had to tackle more
than a moderately heavy seasonal load of
-cereals and tea. It now had to undertake a
much increased load of civil traffic and had to
be further pressed to meet the needs not only

“of the large Imperial forces operating on the
Northern and Southern Fronts, but also of the
Sino-American forces based on Ledo and, last
but not least, the air ferry service to China.
Concurrently, road and river transportation
had been developed to take some of the strain.

SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 19 MARCH, 1951

151. The Northern and Southern Lines of
Communication areas are divided by the Garo
and Jaintia Hills and the only lateral communi-
cation connecting them is the hill section of
the Bengal and Assam Railway.

152. The whole area was without airfields
and so low-lying as to render airfield construc-
tion difficult. It entailed, not only the trans-
portation of heavy tonnages of engineer stores,
but also of coal, since much surfacing had to
be done with burnt brick.

The move and maintenance of forces by air,
as well as our probable future commitments,
have necessitated a large increase in airfield
construction, but I shall deal with this subject
in greater detail later on.

153. I propose to deal with the work of my
Administrative Services under the following
main headings:—

(a) Adjutant-General questions.

(6) The Lines of Communication.
(c) Supply and Maintenance.

(@) The Engineering Effort.

(e) The Civil Affairs Service, Burma.

Adjutant-General Questions.

154. Manpower. The “ divisional slice” in
this Theatre has averaged 56,000, excluding
civil labour, and 70,000 including it, whereas,
I believe, the “ divisional slice ” in Normandy
is 40,000. The high figure in the Burma cam-
paign is mainly due to the large administrative
“tail”, comprising numerous engineer and
labour units, which are needed to overcome
the physical difficulties on our lines of com-
munication.

155. Reinforcements. The demand for rein-
forcements is heavy, owing to the high sick
rate which is, however, much lower than anti-
cipated, and to the time lag between demand
and arrival, due to the distances which rein-
forcements have to cover over a long and in-
different transportation system.

Reinforcement has been below wastage ; but,
apart from British infantry, in which the
shortage is most acute, it has not been so
serious as to impair fighting efficiency. Broadly
speaking, the numbers available have been in
excess of battle casualties, but they have not
been sufficient to meet the total wastage and
thus keep reinforcement camps full.

. 156. British reinforcements for Fourtzenth
Army are provided by General Headquarters,
India, from (a) the British Base Reinforcement
Camp at Deolali, (b) personnel freed by the
disbandment of units, e.g. A.A. Brigades, aad
(c) returning sick from hospitals in India.
Except for (c), who go direct to reinforcement
camps in the Fourteenth Army area, drafts
pass through 52 ‘Training Brigade, where they
cafry out a two months course of hardening
and jungle training. Indian reinforcements,
from Regimental Centres and Depots, pass
through either 14 or 39 Indian Training
Divisions to Fourteenth Army reinforcement
camps. There are twelve such camps in the
Army area, consisting each of two British and
eight Indian Sections. Each Section is 300
strong, and the total capacity of each camp
is thus 3,000. Training staffs are available in
each camp to keep reinforcements at a proper
state of efficiency.
