1360

dates by bombing and cannon fire provi
most helpful. Prowse

85. Kohima was relieved by 6 Brigade of 2
British Division on the 20th April. This
Division had hard fighting before it was able
to break through the defences which the enemy
held astride the Dimapur—Kohima road and
gain touch with the garrison which by that
time had been driven on to one small hill
called Summer Hill in the centre of the area.

86. I have dealt with this comparatively
small operation in some detail, not only in
justice to a gallant defence, but because the
holding of Kohima was of great importance,
and its successful defence proved to be the
turning point in the campaign.

The Relief of Imphal.

87. H.Q. 33 Corps reached Dimapur on the
8th April. The general outline of the Com-
mander’s plan was as follows: —

(a) Cover the Manipur Road base.

(6) Capture Kohima area as a starting
point for offensive operations.

(©) Operate offensively on the general axis
of the Dimapur—Imphal road, as soon as the
concentration of his forces permitted.

88. The Japanese held the Kohima area
in strength except for Summer Hill. Their
strongpoints were nearly, although as it proved
not quite, inaccessible to our tanks: but
Kohima was cleared of the enemy by the 2nd
June by 2 British and 7 Indian Divisions, after
some weeks of severe hand-to-hand fighting in
which the Japanese lost heavily. Our casual-
ties were not light. By the 6th June, we had
captured the Aradura Spur, which covered the
road some two miles south of Kohima. —

89. While these operations were in progress,
columns of 23 Long-Range Penetration Brigade
of Special Force were clearing the country
north-east and east of Kohima, and moving
southwards by the jungle tracks on Jessami.

90. The capture of Kohima and the clearing
of the difficult and hilly country which lies
immediately to the east and south of it,
marked the first step in our counter-offensive.
The Japanese offensive against our base at
Manipur Road had been driven back with very
heavy losses to the enemy, and the threat to
our road and rail communications in North-
East Assam had been removed. There re-
mained the urgent task of re-openi
fo Imphal urgi pening the road

91. Our dispositions at this time were :—

268 Indian Lorried Infantry Brigade (33
Corps): Holding Kohima.

23 Long-Range Penetration Brigade :
Clearing Jessami area and moving south-
wards parallel to the Kohima—Imphal
toad.

2 British Division : Advancing south down
the Imphal road from Kohima in pursuit of
the retreating enemy.

7 Indian Division: Less 89 Brigade (still
under 4 Corps), but with 161 Brigade (5
Indian Division) under command, operating
on the left flank of 2 British Division.

5 92. The advance south from the Aradura
pur ent: severe fighting and our progress,
especially that of our tanks, was hindered by

SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 19 MAROH,. 1951

minefields covered by Japanese artillery ; but,
by the 2ist June, the leading elements of 2
British Division had reached Milestone 102.
As forward troops of 5 Indian Division from
4 Corps at this time were in the vicinity of
Milestone 111, the gap between the two Corps
had been reduced to nine miles.

93. 7 Indian Division, which had been
operating through very difficult country east
of the road, had naturally been unable to keep
level with 2 British Division astride the road ;
but they had contributed greatly to its advance
by capturing several enemy positions on the
Japanese lines of communication leading east
from the Imphal road, and had thus compelled
the enemy to retire.

23 Long-Range Penetration Brigade operat-
ing further east, wide on the left flank of 7
Indian Division, caused er interference
with the enemy’s communications by cutting
the Kharasom—Ukhrul track and other tracks
to the southward.

94. At about 1245 hours on the 22nd June,
2 British and 5 Indian Divisions met at Mile-
stone 109 from Dimapur (twenty-nine miles
from Imphal) and the road to Imphal was
open. 31 Japanese Division, which had been
allotted the task of capturing Kohima and the
base at Dimapur. had been severely defeated,
and was shortly to meet with virtual annihila-
tion.

95. I think the somewhat confused fighting
may be more easily followed if I here briefly
summarise the phases of the battle for the
Imphal Plain. The main stages were:—

(a) The fighting withdrawal of 17 Indian
Light Division and 20 Indian Division.

(5) The Japanese attack on Kohima. dia

(c) The rearguard action by 50 ian
pacinee Brigade from Ukhrul, and the
making of a defensive position north-east of
Imphal by 5 Indian Division. ;

(@) The further withdrawal by 20 Indian
Division to shortern the southern front and
thus enable troops to be released for the
attack on 15 Japanese Division north-east of
Imphal.

(e) The transfer of effort to the south to
deal with 33 Japanese Division, and thus to
clear the threat to Imphal from that quarter
before launching a major offensive north-
wards, in co-ordination with the drive south
by 33 Corps, to clear the Imphal—Kohima
toad. .

(f) The operations to open the road, com-
bined with the subsidiary operations to
capture Ukhrul, which was the vital point
on the lines of communication of 15 and
31 Japanese Divisions.

96. The elimination of the threat to our lines
of communication in North-East Assam and
the opening of the road from Kohima to
Imphal ended a definite phase of the campaign.
31 Japanese Division had been so roughly
handled that it had Practically lost all fighting
value. Similarly, the offensive value of the
enemy’s 15 and 33 Divisions had been
greatly reduced by the very heavy losses they
had incurred. A conservative estimate of the
enemy’s casualties in killed alone amounted to
13,500, which excluded losses by our air action.
To this, of course, must be added their wounded |
