1376

In Arakan, there was the problem of villagers
rendered homeless by military operations, and,
at present some 50,000 civilians are being
accommodated, supervised, and supplied under
the auspices of the welfare organization.

217. Representation in China. In November
1943, an officer of the C.A.S.B. was, with the
approval of the War Office, attached to the
staff of our Assistant Military Attaché at
Kunming (China) to advise on Civil Affairs
maatters generally and, in particular, on political
questions arising out of the operations of the
Chinese forces over the Burma border from
Yunnan.

218. Future Commitments. While adminis-
tering the relatively small area of Burma
which is at present under our control, we have
also to look forward to the future, when the
whole of Burma is re-occupied and returns
under British Military Administration.

With this in view, it has recently been
decided to combine into a single team the
C.AS.B. planning team and the Government
of Burma planning team, for the preparation
of a two-year plan covering, from every aspect,
the re-establishment of the administrative and
economic life of Burma. This will, I hope,
ensure continuity, and a fair start for the
Administration when conditions permit of the
Government of Burma taking over the country
from the C.A.S.B.

Tribute.

219. I referred in my introductory remarks
on administration to the well known fact that
the success or failure of an army is largely
dependent on the efficiency of rear organiza-
tion. It follows, therefore, that the successes
which the Fourteenth Army has achieved are
attributable, in no small measure, to the mag-
nificent work of the rearward services. I have
given some indication of the size and com-
plexity of the problems which have had to be
tackled. That they have been, or are being,
solved, is due to the skill and determination
displayed both by the Administrative Staff and
Services of 11 Army Group and its subordinate
formations, and the Commander-in-Chief,
India, and his staff who not only laid the
foundations on which we have built, but on
whose administrative support we continue to
depend.

Location of Headquarters.

220. I cannot finish this Despatch without
referring to the difficulties by which I was
continually hampered in commanding and ad-
ministering 11 Army Group by the decision
of the Supreme Allied Commander to move
his H.Q. to Kandy in Ceylon in April 1944.*

Before South-East Asia Command was set
up in October 1943, the Commander-in-Chief,
India, commanded the land forces operating
against the Japanese and the roots of the
Army, which was predominantly Indian, were
deeply embedded in India. It was obvious
that, even after the transfer of command to

* War Office footnote—The views of the Supreme
Allied Comman and his reasonsfor the move
Ceylon are set out in Part A., paragraphs 12-14 of his
Report, “ South-East Asia, 1943-1945.”

SUPPLEMENT To tHE LONDON GAZETTE, 19 MARCH, 1951

the Supreme Allied Commander, very close
administrative connection between the two
Commands would be necessary and indeed
orders were issued by the Chiefs of Staff that
the forces of S.E.A.C. would be based upon
India. It was clear that the relationship be-
tween G.H.Q. India and 11 Army Group which
was formed to command and administer the
British land forces of $.E.A.C. would have to
be very intimate.

The formation of H.Q. 11 Army Group was
slow, for while it was possible for the Com-
mander-in-Chief, India, to provide some of
the officers and clerks required, it was clear
that the majority of both would have to come
from outside India; and as the needs of other
‘theatres of war were urgent many months
elapsed before these officers and men could be
sent. It was, in consequence, impossible for
H.Q. 11 Army Group to move with H.Q.
S.E.A.C. in April owing to shortage of staff,
mouch of whose work had still to be done by
G.H.Q., India.

The decision of the Supreme Allied Com-
mander to move his H.Q. in April, therefore,
entailed the splitting—difficult for any staff
however efficient—of H.Q. 11 Army Group
before it was fully formed, because it was
necessary for me to be represented at Kandy.
I had to send my M.G. GS., the most senior
officer on my staff, as I had no other officer
of adequate experience. This was a grave
handicap to the efficient formation and train-
ing of the staff and to me. I had in addition to
send with him some 40 officers and the neces-
sary clerks. As no, telephone communications
existed—the highest’ priority telegrams took
several hours and letters not less than 3 days
—consultation between my main H.Q. at
Delhi and the Advanced H.Q. at Kandy was
slow and difficult.

In addition to the work at Delhi, I had of
course continually to visit the forward troops
and the Commander, Fourteenth Army, to
control operations. I could only make
occasional visits to Kandy, a journey to which
from Delhi or Calcutta took more than 12
hours, except in the fastest aircraft. I was
compelled to do much unnecessary travelling.

I pointed out on several occasions the very
serious disadvantages of trying to control
operations in Assam and Arakan from a H.Q.
more than 1,500 miles from either area, with-
out telephones, with slow telegraphic and long,
and at certain times of the year unreliable
air communication ; further that the Air Com-
‘mander responsible for the support of the
Army would not be at Kandy. I continued
to press for the establishment of H.Q. 11 Army
Group at Calcutta. In August it was at last
agreed that H.Q. 11 Army Group should move
to the Calcutta area but much time had been
lost and the move could not be completed until °
the beginning of December, at which moment
operations would be in progress. -

Acknowledgements.

221. My thanks are due to many officers for
their ungrudging assistance, but it is not pos-
sible to mention more than a few of them.
