1358

Division, therefore, became so closely involved
that the Commander, 4 Corps had to make
use of the greater portion of 23 Indian Divi-
sion, his only reserve, to assist in extricating
it. This had serious results as the forces de-
fending Ukhrul were so reduced that the enemy
was able to capture the place.

65. I had for many months been anxious
to increase the strength of 4 Corps by another

division ; but the low capacity of the line of .

communication had prevented its maintenance
in that area and I had to be content, therefore,
with one extra brigade, 50 Indian Parachute
Brigade, which was brought in early in March.

66. With the start of the Japanese offensive,
administrative risks had to be taken and
General Slim decided to move 5 Indian Divi-
sion from Arakan to the Imphal—Kohima
area. Its move by train and air began on the
19th March. Divisional H.Q., 9 and 123
Indian Infantry Brigades, were moved to
Imphal and 161 Indian Infantry Brigade was
moved to Dimapur. The move was finished o
the 12th April. ’

The Army Commander also transferred 3
Commando Brigade from Arakan to Silchar
early in April, with the réle of operating
along the track to Bishenpur.

Shortly. after this, General Slim moved 7
Indian Division from Arakan (two brigades by
air and one by rail): one brigade joining 4
Corps by the 18th April, whilst the Division
Jess this brigade was allotted to 33 Corps,
the Headquarters of which had been flown
from India to the Dimapur area. 2 British
Division was moved by air and train from
Bombay to Dimapur, the move being com-
pleted between the 25th April and the 2nd
May. 33 Corps then comprised 2 British Divi-
sion, 7 Indian Division (less one brigade), one
brigade of 5 Indian Division, 23 Long-Range
Penetration Brigade, which had been brought
forward from India by that time, and the
equivalent of a regiment of tanks. It was later
teinforced by a lorried infantry brigade.

67. The situation caused me some anxiety
during this time and I was very grateful for
the valuable assistance which was given me
both by the Commander-in-Chief, India, and
by General Stilwell. The former, with that
unfailing readiness to help which he has always
displayed, had put H.Q. 33 Corps, 2 British
Division, H.Q. 21 Indian Division (late H.Q.
44 Indian Armoured Division), 268 Indian
Lorried Infantry Brigade, two regiment of
tanks and other troops at my disposal. General
Stilwell undertook the defence of aerodromes
and communications in an area agreed on be-
tween him and General Slim, deflecting Chinese
troops for this purpose.

68. 17 Indian Light Division pulled out of
Tiddim on the 17th March and, after hard
fighting, in which the enemy suffered heavy
losses, succeeded in cutting its way through to
Imphal early in April. This Division in spite
of many difficulties had succeeded in bringing
through most of its transport and vital stores,
together with its wounded during the with-
drawal up the Tiddim road. The Silchar—
Bishenpur track was cut by the enemy’s
advance.

SUPPLEMENT to THE LONDON GAZETTE, 19 MARCH, 1951

On the 15th March, 15 Japanese Division
crossed the Chindwin at Thaungdut and their
31 Division at Homalin and Tamanthi. 20
Indian Division was withdrawn to better posi-
tions north-west of Tamu, astride the road
leading to Imphal,

A few days later, the enemy attacked 50
Indian Parachute Brigade at Ukhrul in force
and after heavy fighting it was forced to with-
draw fighting towards Imphal.

69. Early in April, we were forced to evacu-
ate Kanglatongbi, astride the Dimapur road,
about 15 miles north of Imphal, and thus lost
the use of our lines of communication between
the railhead at Dimapur and Imphal.

4 Corps Operations on the Imphal Front.

70. The plan of the Commander, 4 Corps
on the 10th April was as follows:— -

{a) To prevent the enemy gaining access
to the Imphal Plain by either the Palel—
Imphal or Tiddim—Imphal roads.

(6) To re-establish a force in the Ukhrul
area and cut the enemy’s line of communi-
cation from the east.

(c) To use the largest possible force
offensively against either 15 or 33 Japanese
Divisions in succession.

71. The successful withdrawal of 17 Indian
Light Division and 20 Indian Division in the
face of heavy pressure has already been mep-
tioned. 20 Indian Division was now holding
positions in depth along the Palel—Tamu road.
The gallant delaying action of 50 Indian Para-
chute Brigade near Ukhrul had proved most
useful, as‘it held up the Japanese advance
down the Ukhrul—imphal road for several
days and thus gave time for the recently arrived
5 Indian Division to concentrate in this area.

20 Indian Division was now still further
withdrawn in order to release troops for a
counter-attack against the Japanese 15 Divi-
sion, north-east of Imphal.

72. Determined enemy attempts against
Imphal from the south and south-east con-
tinued, but were successfully withstood by 20
Indian Division. At the end of April, 23 Indian
Division on the right, 5 Indian Division (less
one brigade) in the centre, and a brigade of
17 Indian Light Division on the left were
advancing north and north-east from Imphal,
and had moved twenty-three miles up the track
running north-east to Ukhrul and ten miles
up the main road north to Kohima. (Imphal
to Ukhrul is sixty-seven miles as the track
sors pod Imphal to Kohima is eighty-four

es.

73. It was apparent from the enemy’s
efforts that he considered the capture of
Imphal to be essential before the monsoon set
in. By the first week in May, however, his
advance had not only been checked, but forced
back in all sectors, except in that of 20 Indian
Division. This division had had to give
ground slightly in the face of heavy attacks by
the Japanese Yamamoto Forte, comp
parts of 33 and 15 Japanese Divisions, up the
Palel road.

74. Heavy fighting had been in progress in
the area of Bishenpur, south-west of Imphal,
for some time, and 33 Japanese Division had
been pressing strongly against 17 Indian Light
