5576

222. It should, perhaps, be mentioned that
plans were made, and all preparatory action
taken for an airborne assault at brigade strength
in the initial phases of the battle. Since this
assault was not carried out, for reasons of an
Army nature, J have made no further reference
to it.

PLANNING FOR THE BATTLE.
The Army Plan.

223. The task before the 15th Army Group
was to destroy some 25 divisions of the enemy
before they could retire north-east into the
Alps towards Austria, and prolong the struggle
from there.

224. The task was a formidable one. On
this west flank, the enemy was firmly planted
in the rugged mountains. On his east flank
he was solidly entrenched behind the Senio,
Santerno, Sillaro and Idice rivers, all compara-
tively wide and steeply banked; an attacker
there faced a maze of ditches, dikes and flooded
fields.

225. Beyond these rivers there were still
others which made good defence lines for the
enemy—the Po and the Adige, both of which
were already fortified. Beyond these again,
were more river lines, and mountains, across
the road to Austria.

226. Against these advantages the enemy was
short of transport, his communications were
under constant air attack, his air power was
negligible, he had very little petrol, and he
was woefully inferior in tanks and guns. The
relentless air attacks to which he had been
subjected in recent months had destroyed his
mobility and had decisively undermined his
whole powers of resistance.

227. It was certain that he would fight des-
perately to retain the Po Valley. If, therefore,
the 15th Army Group could achieve a quick
break-through and a rapid exploitation, huge
enemy forces might well be destroyed or cap-
tured before they could retire across the Po.

228. The possible lines of attack were
severely restricted. The 15th Army Group’s
front now ran from the Comacchio lagoon on
the Adriatic to just below Massa on the
Ligurian Sea skirting south of Bologna. The
Fifth Army held the mountainous zig-zag Jine
from Massa to Monte Grande, ten miles south-
east of Bologna; the Eighth Army line ran
south-east from Monte Grande, across the
Sillaro and Santerno Rivers, and then north-
east along the Senio’s south bank to the
southern shore of Lake Comacchio and the
Adriatic.

229. It was decided that the main effort of
15th Army Group should be launched in the
Bologna area by the Fifth Army, since once
the latter reached the Po valley, the terrain
in their front favoured a quick break-through
and a rapid advance,

230. This main thrust by the Fifth Army was
to be preceded by an Eighth Army attack, with
the object of drawing enemy reserves away
from the Fifth Army front.

231. The plan therefore fell into three main
parts, which were to follow each other without
any pause. In the first stage, each Army would
break through the heavily defended enemy

SUPPLEMENT to THE LONDON GAZETTE, 29 OCTOBER, 195i

lines opposing it—the Eighth Army first,
breaching Senio and the Santerno lines and at-
tacking towards Bastia and Budrio; the Fifth
Army second, breaking out of the mountains
and into the Po Valley, with the secondary
mission of capturing or isolating Bologna.

232. The second stage provided for a break-
through by either or both Armies to encircle
the enemy forces south of the Po, The Eighth
Army was to go through the Argenta Gap to
seize the Po crossings at Ferrara and Bondeno,
and there make contact with Fifth Army
columns exploiting north-east from Route 9
down the corridor north of the Reno. A secon-

Fifth Army effort was to be made north-
ward on Ostiglia.

233. In the third stage, operations were to
be directed toward crossing the Po and ex-
ploiting northward, especially with the object
of capturing Verona. If the situation permitted,
further exploitation toward and across the Adige
River was to follow.

234. As a prelude to this main attack, two
‘important subsidiary operations were to be
carried out. The first of these was an attack
against Massa, on the extreme left of the battle
front, in order to keep the Germans in that area
occupied. The second was an amphibious
operation to capture the isthmus projecting be-
tween Lake Comacchio and the Adriatic, which
would give the Eighth Army free access to the
Lake, and prepare the way for further am-
phibious operations which were to aid in
opening the road through the Argenta Gap to
Ferrara.

The Naval Plan.

235. The Navy plan for the final offensive
was drawn up to give the Army as much sup-
port as possible. On the Eighth Army front
the capture of the Argenta gap would require
an assault in tank landing vessels, across the
flooded country surrounding the Valle di
Comacchio. A Naval party was to be formed
to assist the Army in training L.V.T. (landing
vessel, tank) squadrons, and to act as navi-
gational leaders in the assault.

236. The coast northwards of Ravenna was
generally unsuitable for amphibious landings.
The enemy was, however, sensitive in this area,
and a concentration of tank landing craft in
the Ravenna-Porto Corsini Canal, combined
with a dummy assault and shore bombardment
by landing craft at Porto Garibaldi, was to be
undertaken in order to delay the movement
towards the battle area of the coastal defence
division stationed there.

237. On the west coast, gun support to the
advance of the Fifth Army along the coast was
to be given by cruisers and destroyers. The
clearing of a gunfire support area between
Viareggio and Spezia would entail further
minesweeping.

238. A flotilla of assault landing craft
manned by Royal Marines was to be carried
overland from Ancona on tank transporters,
and launched into the Po River to assist in
the crossing. .

239. Plans were made for the harbours of
Genoa, Trieste and Savona to be opened, and
also the Port of Venice as a standby, in case
there should be difficulty with the Jugoslavs
over the use of Trieste. :
