5580

Day 20th April. Fifth Army front.

284. On the morning of the 20th the leading
elements of the Fifth Army broke out of the
Appenines into the Po Valley, and took up
positions astride Highway g between Bologna
and Modena. Preparations were immediately
made for an attack on Bologna, all the high
ground before it having by now been cleared.

285. At last the Fifth Army was ready to
‘begin its drive across the Po Valley, first be-
tween the Rivers Reno and Panaro, and then
across the latter and up to the Po.

Tue EicutH ARMy OFFENSIVE.

286. I have now reached a suitable stage in
the narrative to go back to the activities of the
Eighth Army. It will be remembered that
I had taken their story to the 14th April, when
a bridgehead had been gained over the Sillaro
River and a strong threat developed towards
the Argenta Gap.

Ground effort 15th to 20th April. Eighth Army
front. .

287. On the right flank, four days were spent
in forcing the Argenta Gap, but on the 16th
Bastia succumbed. On the 19th the infantry
fanned out into the open country beyond
Argenta, though resistance from strong points
and defence posts, and at canals, was still met.
An armoured brigade previously held in reserve
was committed, and began to move through the
gap to break the defence wide open.

288. In the centre, on the r7th April, a
sweeping advance was made from the bridge-
head across the Sillaro, along the Medicina-
Budrio railway, until it was halted by yet
another defended river position on the Gaiano.
By the 2oth this river had been crossed and
the advance continued to the next river, the
Idice. By this time the resistance was falter-
ing, and a bridgehead was quickly gained here.

289. On the southern flank, the Polish Corps
pressed on along and north of Route 9, and
on the evening of the 17th opened long-range
artillery fire on the enemy in Bologna. By the
zoth the core of resistance in this sector was
broken, and the advance here, together with
that in the centre, was menacing the enemy’s
escape route from Bologna along Route 64 to
Ferrara.

Summary of the air effort from 15th to 20th
Apni.

Eighth Army front.

2go. During these days the Desert Air Force
continued its effort over the entire Fighth Army
front at full intensity—a typical effort being
that of the 16th when some 800 sorties were
flown on Army support targets. A great deal
of the D.A.F. air effort was concentrated on
assisting our troops through the Argenta Gap.
A secondary effort was aimed at assisting the
advance in the centre.

2g. As the enemy was forced from his front
line positions, the distribution of his forces be-
came increasingly disorganised, and it became
difficult, therefore, to brief fighter-bomber pilots
concerning their targets before take-off. In
these conditions, briefing in the air by advanced
mobile operations sections—‘‘ Rovers ’’—paid
rich dividends. Of D.A-F.’s effort on the 16th
April, of 800 sorties on close support targets,
two-thirds were directed iby forward

SUPPLEMENT to THE LONDON GAZETTE, 29 OCTOBER, 1951

“* Rovers ’’’. ‘‘ Timothies ’’, a code name for
assaults by relays of fighter-bombers against
points of resistance in the path of our advanc-
ing troops, were flown all day and every day.
A feature of the attacks was the increased em-
ployment of fuel tank incendiary bombs which
created widespread havoc over gun areas and
strong-points..

292. There can be no doubt that the assist-
ance given by the Air Force to the Army during
this period of reducing the enemy’s highly
organised defences had a decisive effect. For
instance, during the twelve days gth-2oth April,
over 3,200 enemy-occupied buildings were
destroyed or damaged by M.A.T.A.F. aircraft.

293. The Tactical medium bombers’ main
effort during this period on the Eighth Anmy
front was directed to helping in the penetration
of the Argenta Gap by bombing assembly areas
and troop concentrations in that area, as well
as those further north around Porto Maggiore.

294. No. 205 Group again gave considerable
assistance by attacks on the enemy’s lines of
retreat. The first was made on the night of
17th/xz8th April against Porto Maggiore in the
Argenta Gap. The attack was extremely suc-
cessful, and the roads of the town were entirely
covered with rubble and craters. The second
attack—and this was the last made by the
Group in direct support of the Army—was
made on the night of rg9th/2oth April on Malal-
bergo, on Route 64 between Bologna and Fer-
rara. The town was at the time being used as
a lateral communication route for enemy troops
facing the Eighth Anmy and as a normal rear
communication route for those facing the Fifth
Army front. The attack was so successful that
thereafter it could be said that Malalbergo
ceased to exist as a communications centre.

295. The night intruders of Desert Air Force
also did extremely valuable work during this
period, attacking villages immediately to the
Tear of the enemy’s front line, bombing cross-
ings, barges and pontoons on the Po and Adige
Rivers, adding weight to the attacks made by
No. 205 Group on key communication centres,
and attacking all road movement to the
enemy’s rear wherever it could be found. A
tribute to the work of these aircraft was paid
by General Von Senger, commanding the Ger-
man armoured forces, who stated: ‘‘ The night
bombing ‘was very effective, and caused heavy
losses.’”

296. A special air operation (bearing the code
name “Herring ’’) added materially to the
enemy’s discomfiture at the beginning of his
retreat. This was on the night of 2oth/azst
of April when a force of over 220 Volunteer
Italian Parachutists was dropped just behind
the enemy’s lines in the Po Valley (mainly
north and north-west of Bologna) by 15 C.47’s
of the 51st Troop Carrier Wing. They achieved
considerable success, killing or capturing over
1,000 Germans and carrying out a varied pro-
gramme of sabotage and demolition.

Tue FirtH aND EIGHTH ARMIES’ OFFENSIVE.

ast to 24th of April.

297. In these four days the German Armies
in the Po Valley were cut to ribbons. Consider-
ing the enemy’s small reserve and limited sup-
plies of petro] and ammunition, normal military
strategy would have dictated withdrawal across
