5562

§2. A close liaison was maintained with the
U.S.A.A.F. supply services, and where con-
venient, supplies of “‘ common user ’’ items
were pooled to achieve maximum efficiency. A
particular instance of this was 1,000 Ib. bombs,
of which there was a shortage in both services.

ORDER OF BATTLE FOR THE FINAL ITALIAN
OFFENSIVE.

53. With but a few minor exceptions, the
order of battle I have described above remained
unchanged for the final Italian offensive, and
in particular, no changes were made which
would impair the effectiveness of M.A.S.A.F.,
M.A.T.A.F., or B.A.F. for giving support to
the ground forces.

54. One change was the transfer of the two
US.A.A.F. special duties squadrons from
B.A.F. to M.A.T.A.F., in order to increase the
effort available for supplying the Italian
Partisans in Northern Italy.

55. On 16th March, I was informed by the
Chief of the Air Staff that in view of the services
overall manpower deficiencies, which had
already arisen in the Royal Air Force, and
which would increase still further in the next
six months unless corrective action were taken,
it was essential that there should be a reduction
in the number of R.A.F. first line squadrons.
The contribution that MEDME would be re-
quired to make was:—

(a) the rolling up of 6 heavy bomber
squadrons of No. 205 Group at the rate of
one per month, commencing in April;

(6) the rolling up of 3 light bomber
squadrons of Desert Air Force immediately;

(c) the rolling up of 4 day fighter or
fighter-bomber squadrons at the rate of one
per month commencing in April;

(@) the transfer of 2 South African medium
Tange general reconnaissance squadrons to
A.C.S.E.A., when operational, so that two
RAF. squadrons could be rolled up in that
theatre;

56. The Chief of the Air Staff emphasised
that he was prepared to consider alternative
proposals provided that they produced no less
saving in manpower.

57. I discussed this matter with my opera-
tional commanders, and decided that in view
of the forthcoming offensive in Italy, it was
most- important that the fighter and fighter-
bomber strength of M.A.T.A.F. should not be
reduced, and that because of the preliminary
success of Marshal Tito’s offensive in Jugo-
slavia, the strength of B.A.F. should also be
maintained as far as possible. On 22nd March,
therefore, I replied to the Chief of the Air Staff,
proposing an alternative programme of reduc-
tions, which would provide the same savings
in manpower, and yet not affect the air power
available for the direct support of the land
forces. At the same time I strongly recommended
that earnest consideration should be given to
the possibility of postponing all reductions for
this theatre until after the end of May, when it
was expected that the operations then imminent
would have passed their critical phase; and if
that were not possible, that at least the post-
ponement of the disbandment of 2 heavy bomber
squadrons, and one light bomber squadron,
which I had included in my programme, should
be considered.

SUPPLEMENT To tHe LONDON GAZETTE, 29 OCTOBER, 1951

58. As a result of these representations, I
was informed by the Air Ministry on the 2nd
April that I should be required to reduce my
strength in April by only 3 squadrons—one
Beaufighter anti-shipping squadron, and 2
fighter or fighter-bomber squadrons. More
extensive reductions were to follow from June
onwards.

59. The three squadrons to be rolled up in
April were found from M.A.C.A.F. and B.A.F.,
the former supplying the Beaufighter anti-
shipping squadron and a fighter squadron
engaged on the escort of air sea rescue aircraft,
and the latter a fighter squadron based in
Greece. Thus the striking power available for
the direct support of the land forces was not
affected.

60. As events turned out, the war in Europe
had finished before the time had come to begin
the reductions scheduled for June, and an
alternative programme was put into effect.

_ Parr IIL.

THE BALKAN AIR FORCE AND AIR
OPERATIONS IN SUPPORT OF THE
JUGOSLAV FOURTH ARMY
OFFENSIVE.*

Tse FORMATION OF BALKAN AIR FORCE AND ITS
(CO-ORDINATING RESPONSIBILITIES.

61. The situation in the Western Balkans,
as the year 1944 progressed, was that con-
siderable German forces were holding the
principal towns and the communications between
them in the face of numerous but ill-co-ordinated
Partisan attacks. The Partisans were provided
with Allied arms and equipment and were
supported by small Allied raiding forces and
by air and naval attacks. This support was,
however, less effective than it might have been,
because, while there was a measure of intelli-
gence co-ordination which enabled the various
air forces concerned to operate fairly success-
fully, there was during the first half of 1944
no Headquarters which provided operational
co-ordination without need for constant refer-
ence to Allied Force Headquarters and
M.A.A.F.

62. In order to provide such co-ordination,
it was decided in May 1944 to apply to trans-
Adriatic operations the principle of three co-
equal Commanders of whom one was to be
charged with the co-ordination of planning and
execution of operations. is was not quite
parallel to the system in force at A.F.H.Q.,
where the Supreme Allied Commander was a
“commander ’’ and not a “‘ co-ordinator '’, nor
to that in force in the Middle East where the
three service commanders were co-equal. So
far as the Balkans were concerned, moreover,
it was appreciated that operations could not be
divorced from politics and were closely inter-
related also to “‘ special ’’ activities.

63. It was thus regarded as essential that
some machinery of co-ordination should also be
provided between the three service Commanders
and the Foreign Office and State Department
representatives in Bari, and between the three
service Commanders and the Special Operations
formation concerned with the Western Balkans.

* As the final offensive in Jugoslavia started earlier
than that in Italy, it will be convenient to trace it to
its completion before dealing with events in the main
theatre,
