SUPPLEMENT to THE LONDON GAZETTE, 29 OCTOBER, 195i

The Air Force Plan.

240. The Air Force plan was to give maxi-
mum assistance to the Armies by close support
operations; to prevent the withdrawal of the
enemy north of the River Po; and, when the
enemy was in sufficient concentration, to en-
sure his destruction.

241. To achieve these aims, the whole
striking power of M.A.T.A.F. and M.A.S.A.F.
was to be used, support of the land forces
becoming the over-riding priority for both Air
Forces as soon as the offensive began.

242. In general the Desert Air Force was to
support the Eighth Army and XXII Tactical
Air Command the Fifth Army, although one
would lend assistance to the other as the ground
situation required, and as determined by H.Q.
Tactical Air Force. The prior objective of these
two forces was to give close support in the
immediate battle areas, The 57th Bombard-
ment Wing of medium bombers was to be used
on either Army front for close support opera-
tions as the situation required.

243. The Strategic Air Force was to be used
in close support operations at the beginning
of the offensives by each Army. Thereafter,
it was to be available to attack communica-
tions targets in Italy, nominated by the Com-
manding General M.A.T.A.F., in order to
maintain the interdiction already accomplished
while M.A.T.A.F, forces were employed upon
immediate battlefield objectives.

244. The opening of the offensive by the
Eighth Army was conditional on a preceding
air assault by both M.A.S.A.F. and M.A.T.A.F.
Entry into the battle of the Fifth Army was to
be dependent upon the gains made by the
Eighth Army, and was therefore to be made
whether or not it was possible to precede it
with an air bombardment.

245. Preceding the 8th Army offensive some
800 Fortresses and Liberators were to bomb
troop concentrations and gun installation areas
3,000 yards behind the enemy front line on
D-day. Roughly 170 medium bombers were
also to attack gun areas, after which 700 fighter-
bombers were to follow with attacks on head-
quarters buildings, strong points and targets of
moment. Approximately 100 Boston, Balti-
more and Mosquito aircraft and the whole of
No. 205 Group were to maintain the attacks
during the night hours.

246. In addition to the close support opera-
tions full tactical and artillery reconnaissances
were to be flown and four ‘‘ Rover ’’* stations
made available.

247, This air programme was planned for
four days and thereafter as required. © Its
execution, together with that for the 5th Army
offensive, is described fully in the narrative of
the final offensive.

Tue Battie.

Preliminary Phase.

248. At 0300 hours on 2nd April the pre-
liminary phase of the battle began. Com-
mandos in powered storm boats attacked at its
western shore the Spit that divides Lake

“ The ‘Rover’’ system was used for bringing air-
craft on to targets visible to a controller who was
usually in a specially adapted armoured car or jeep—
so that close support aircraft could be up to the minute
with a rapidly advancing ground force

5577

Comacchio from the Adriatic, After two days
fighting, the Spit had been taken, together with
nearly 1,000 prisoners, thus eliminating enemy
observation of the Eighth Army's right flank.
This attack was helped, especially on the 2nd
April, by fighter bombers and medium
bombers, who bombed gun positions, troops,
and other battlefield targets. ,

249. A further attack was made on the night
of the 6th April across the Reno River on the
Lake’s southern shore and by the 8th, a bridge-
head had been secured across the River. These
two operations had secured the Eighth Army’s
right flank for their main attack.

250. On the 5th April, on the extreme left
of the battle-front, an operation was under-
taken to capture Massa. This was a diversion
to keep the Germans busy in the west. Air
support for this operation was provided by
fighter bombers and medium bombers. The
latter also flew missions against coastal guns
near La Spezia which threatened to menace
the Army advance up the western coast.

Tue EicHTH ARMY OFFENSIVE.

251. The first phase was to break the series
of river lines—Senio, Santerno, Reno and
Sillaro—in which the enemy was very strongly
entrenched. The Air Forces’ task was to make
these defence lines one by one untenable. -

252.°The first main assault began on oth
April when M.A.S.A.F. was used to pound the
enemy’s front line positions. Some 800
Fortresses and Liberators of 15th Air Force
attacked troop concentrations between the
Rivers Senio and Santerno. Medium bombers
supplemented the attack and concentrated on
gun positions. These in turn were followed by
the full weight of Tactical Air Force’ fighter-
bombers, who bombed, straffed and fired
rockets at enemy positions to the West of the
Senio River and along the floodbanks of the
river itself.

253. At I920 hours the Eighth Army’s V
Corps on the right and the II Polish Corps on
the left opened the assault on the Senio posi-
tions near Lugo. By nightfall a bridgehead
had been gained and bridges thrown across the
tiver.

254. The effect of the preliminary air bom-
bardment can be judged from the fact that, in
spite of extremely difficult terrain and formid-
able defences, the army gained its objectives
with remarkably light losses. The New Zealand
Division, for instance, crossed the Senio with-
out a single casualty, killed or wounded.

Night oth-roth April—Eighth Army Front.
255. Following up the heavy raids of the
afternoon, 72 Liberators of No. 205 Group
dropped a further 200 tons of bombs on forti-
fied positions along the Santerno River, to
which the enemy had retreated after the heavy
air attack in the afternoon and to which he had
also brought forward two reserve divisions.
This raid was in preparation for the Army
attack on the Santerno positions which was to
take place the following day. The employ-
ment of heavy bombers by night so close to
our own positions was a new development, and
undoubtedly surprised and dismayed the
enemy. The attack was carried out within a
period of four minutes and not a single bomb
