SUPPLEMENT to THE LONDON GAZETTE, 29 OCTOBER, 1951

German Armies were attacked, and we had now
to consider military needs after the end of the
Italian battle, and those of the civil economy.
The Strategic day bombers’ last big attack
on Italian railway: targets was made on the
24th April, when a high proportion of 1,200
bombers and fighters bombed or straffed rail-
way communications in North-East Italy and
along the Brenner route, while the remainder
attacked the continuation of these lines in
Austria, Italian road bridges and _ supply
targets. By night, in the meantime, No. 205
Group made two raids on the Verona Parma
bridge, at the southern end of the Brenner.
The operations of the M.A.S.A.F. day and
night bombers against the railway system in
Austria, Jugoslavia and Southern Germany,
which in many cases directly affected the
supply of Italy, are considered in Part IV.

323. From the gth to 16th April, when the
battle raged at full intensity, the Tactical
medium fbombers were able to devote little
attention to their customary railway targets;
from the latter date until the 27th (when bad
weather grounded the mediums for the rest of
the month) the offensive was continued against
Brenner line targets and a smaller effort was
directed against the north-eastern routes and
two bridges in southern Austria and north-
west Jugoslavia. The total sorties flown by
the Tactical mediums during ‘April against
railway communications amounted to 1,374 in
the course of which 2,688 tons of bombs were
dropped. Seventy-seven per cent. of these
sorties were flown against Brenner line targets.
Results of the interdiction policy during April.

324. Definite blocks on the Brenner route
varied between five and eighteen throughout
the month, so that at no time was continuous
through traffic possible.

325. The three north-eastern frontier rail-
way routes remained out by the destruction of
bridges for the third month in succession. The
important northern line was apparently given
priority for repairs, but despite this, was never
made fully serviceable. Spasmodic attempts
were made to repair the central line for a
time, but at last the unequal struggle was
given up altogether. This had been the case
with the southern lines for a long time.

326. Further south, through traffic was at
no time possible across the Venetian Plain.
The Brenta zone of interdiction was well main-
tained; in particular, an attempt to make the
Padua north railway bridge serviceable was
forestalled by a M.A.S.A.F. attack on the 11th
April. More repair activity was apparent in
the Piave River zone, but here again,
M.AS.A.F. heavy bombers prevented any
return to serviceability of the Nervesa and
Ponte di Piave diversions. Less interdiction
was maintained at the Livenza River zone, but
this was comparatively unimportant owing to
the disruption at Nervesa, further west. In
the Tagliamento River zone, the Latisana
diversion was still incomplete when it fell into
Allied hands, and that a Casarsa, kept out
of action by M.A.T.A.F. fighter-bombers until
the r2th, was knocked out for the last time
by M.A.S.A.F. on the 24th.

327. In the north-central zone of the Po
valley, through traffic was impossible between
Verona and Milan until the 22nd April, but

5583

the few bridges which were made serviceable
after that date obviously availed the enemy
little as the result of the campaign was then
a foregone conclusion.

328. All the permanent railway bridges over
the Po from Bressana Bottarone to the east
coast remained out of action and no attempt
was made to repair them. :

The part played by M.A.C.A.F. in the final
offensive.

329. In my description of the part played
‘by the Air Forces in the final offensive, I have
not thus far mentioned the work done by
M.A.C.A.F. I should therefore like now to
make specific reference to its efforts.

330. In operations connected with the
Italian campai, ing the month of April,
M.A.C.A.F. destroyed 328 motor vehicles and
damaged 234 more; destroyed or damaged 30
locomotives and over 230 units of rolling
stock; and damaged three bridges. These
operations were carried out especially at the
western end of the Po Valley, thus enabling
M.A.T.A.F. aircraft to be concentrated on the
main battle front.

331. In its own particular sphere of activity,

M.AC.A.F. during the month of April
damaged one ship over 1,000 tons, sank 12
smaller craft (including a midget submarine),
and damaged 32 more. Air-sea rescue opera-
tions resulted in the saving of 118 aircrew
personnel.

Other Air Force activities during the battle
period.

332. With the very small air force at the
enemy’s disposal, only a very small part of
the Allied Air Force’s effort was required in
counter-air activity. The enemy air effort was
limited to occasional unsuccessful attacks on
Allied photographic reconnaissance aircraft,
and to small-scale ground attack activity by
Stukas and Me. 109 fighter bombers in the battle
area. This latter effort reached its peak on
the night 22nd-23rd April, when ten to fifteen
sorties were reported on the Fifth and Eighth
Armies’ fronts. After that date this harassing
activity quickly declined as the Allied ground-
forces over-ran the bases at Villafranca (10
miles S.W. of Verona) and Ghedi (10 miles

.SSE. of Brescia) and later at Thiene (15 miles

N. of Vicenza).

333. Both long-range and short-range recon-
naissance by the enemy was om a reduced scale
during the battle and quite inadequate to give
the German commanders any picture of
developments on our armies’ fronts and in the
rear areas.

334. On sixteen of the seventeen nights
from 8th to 25th April, Tactical Air Force
night-fighters flew qeconnaissance _ flights
over the Ghedi, Villafranca, Bergamo (30
miles NE. of Milan) and Thiene airfields, and
made attacks when opportune. Day attacks
on airfields resulted in a total of 40 enemy
aircraft destroyed on the ground and 27
damaged.

335. In April, M.A.T.A.F. supply dropping
aircraft working with Italian Partisan Forces
flew 711 sorties, of which 485 were effective;
of the non-effective sorties, 107 failed Because :
of lack of signals in the dropping
Nearly 950 tons of supplies were Bropped, 0 of
