Pumb. 39367

5557

SUPPLEMENT TO.

The London Gazette

OF TUESDAY, 23rd OCTOBER, 1951
Publishes by Authority

Registered as a newspaper

MONDAY, 29 OCTOBER, 1951

THE PART PLAYED BY THE ALLIED AIR FORCES IN THE
FINAL DEFEAT OF THE ENEMY IN THE MEDITERRANEAN
THEATRE, MARCH To MAY, 10945.

The following despatch was submitied to the
Secretary of State for Air in September, 1946,
by Air Chief Marshal Sir GUY GARROD,
K.C.B., O.B.E., M.C., D.F.C., Commander-
in-Chief, Royal Air Force, Mediterranean and
Middle East, and Deputy Air Commander-
in-Chief, Mediterranean Allied Air Forces.

INTRODUCTION.

1. This despatch bears witness to the part
played by the Air Forces in the final stages of
the Mediterranean campaign. Their contribu-
tion was one of the deciding factors in the final
victory in that Theatre. The despatch covers
the period of my appointment as Commander-
in-Chief, Royal Air Force, Mediterranean and
Middle East, and as Deputy Air Commander-
in-Chief, Mediterranean Allied Air Forces, from
16th March, 1945, when J assumed command
from Air Marshal Sir John Slessor, until
hostilities ceased in the Theatre—on 2nd May,
1945, for the Italian Sector, and 8th May,
1945, for the Balkan Sector.

2. The purpose of a despatch is to give a
short and lucid account of the main events
during the period of a Commander-in-Chief’s
appointment. This task may not present any
major difficulty in the case of a Command such
as Bomber Command, which is purely func-
tional, with singleness of aim and resources.
But in the case of a geographical Command
such as MEDME, the task is more complicated.
Not only did my Command contain within it
the three main types of functional command—
Strategic, Tactical and Coastal—so that I was
responsible for a complete range of opera-
tional air activity, but it also presented a large

number of problems not directly operational in
character, some of them purely air matters,
such as questions of Transport Command bases,
some of them of a political nature, such as my
dealings with the Greek and Jugoslav govern-
ments.

3. Then again, MEDME command had an
unusual structure, arising out of the develop-
ment of the war in the Mediterranean, in that
it contained as a sub-command the R.A.F.
Middle East, whose chief problems in 1945
concerned internal security and training
matters. It was desirable therefore that the
A.O.C.-in-C. R.A.F. Middle East, though
under my command, -should exercise a large
measure of autonomy.

4. Finally, the operations of the Royal Air
Force in MEDME were inextricably bound up
with those of the United States Army Air Force. .
An integration of Command had been achieved
which was more complete than that to be found
jim any other Theatre. So it would be quite
impossible to write a despatch dealing only with
R.A.F. activities—it would be like trying to
build a house with only two walls.

5. Under these circumstances, I have not
attempted to deal with every subject which
arose during my period of command, but only
with outstanding events, I have given only
as much detail as was necessary to present a
balanced picture of these events. In particular,
I have not attempted to cover the problems
which arose in the Middle East, nor have I
given a complete history of each of the R.A.F.
formations under my command—their activi-
ties are covered only- in so far as they
participated in the main events described.
