SUPPLEMENT to THE LONDON GAZETTE, 29 OCTOBER, 1951

Gargano, peninsula. _ Special Operations air-
craft operated from Brindisi and Lecce. On
occasions, however, particularly when the
Germans were withdrawing from Greece,
Brindisi was used as an advanced base by all

87. In addition to bases in Italy, an ad-
vanced base was available on the island of
Vis throughout B.A.F.’s period of operations.
Owing to the shortness of the landing strip and
bad approaches, this was normally only used
by fighter-bombers, with a daily average of
some 35 sorties. During 1945 it became more
and more a special advanced base of the Italian
Spitfire and P-39 squadrons. It was not suit-
able for Macchis,

88. From February onwards, an advanced
landing ground was established at Prkos, near
Zadar, and gradually developed until, by the
end of April, No. 281 Wing, which by then
comprised all single-engined squadrons except
the Italians, was based there.

Operational Conditions.

8 9. The lack of adequate air bases on the
east side of the Adriatic meant that a v
great majority of sorties flown by Balkan Air
Force involved a double sea crossing of at least
too miles in each direction, and often much
more, which added considerably to the strain
on aircrew, particularly after facing heavy
flak.

90. Added to this were the dangers in-
separable from operations in . mountainous
country during the extremely cloudy weather
conditions prevalent during the winter. More-
over, when aircraft reached the target area, the
tugged mountainous nature of the country often
made attacks difficult to carry out, as for in-
stance, when targets were road or rail move-
ment running through ravines, as was
frequently the case.

gx. These conditions combined with the
nature of the work to make operations in the
Balkans, particularly by fighter-bombers and
Beaufighters, as tough as those normally carried
out in other theatres in spite of the almost com-
plete lack of air opposition. On the other side,
however, was the compensating advantage that
if shot or forced down in the Balkans there was
always a good chance of falling into friendly
hands and sooner or later getting back to Italy.
Towards the end, missing aircrews would very
often be back with their units within two or
three days.

g2. Another result of these conditions was
that calls from the Partisans for support were
very often impossible to meet. The difficulties
were not always appreciated by the Partisans
who, except when weather conditions obviously
made an attack impossible, were apt to inter-
pret the non-fulfilment of a task as an example
of bad faith and non-co-operation.

British Liaison Officers and Target Information.

93- With friendly forces located throughout
Jugoslavia and Albania, and with excellent in-
formation being passed by the British Liaison
Officers attached to all main Partisan Head-
quarters, a wealth of data on German forma-
tions and enemy movement was always avail-
able. A vast amount of intelligence of all kinds
was received at Headquarters, and collated and
evaluated by the intelligence staffs of the three
services. .

5565

94. In a very great number of cases however
when Partisan Headquarters desired air attacks
to be made on specific targets they did not pass
adequate or detailed information on the target
through the British liaison officers, and often
requests to attack German isons: in towns
failed to give detailed aiming points. The
obtaining of such vital information therefore
led to delays before attacks could be carried
out.

Target Clearance.

95. One of the major difficulties encountered
in operating over Jugoslavia was the fact that
targets could not be attacked without prior
clearance from Partisan G.H.Q. This authority
was delegated, as regards tactical targets, to
Partisan subordinate Army H.Q.’s; but as far
as major strategical targets were concerned,
delays by Partisan G.H.Q. in giving clearance
often seriously delayed or hindered attacks of
considerable importance. On occasions, clear-
ance was refused and attacks could not be
made.

96. One could understand the reluctance of
the Jugoslavs to clear targets in their own
country for heavy air attack, with the inevitable
damage to their towns and civilians, but often
this permission was refused or withheld for
long periods in spite of the fact that the enemy
were obviously attaching great importance to
the targets and possibly taking advantage of
such “‘immunity.”’ Thus Ljubljana marshal-
ling yard, which had over 1,000 units of rolling
stock in the later stages, was not cleared for
attack. It is only fair to state, however, that
permission was normally withheld only when
targets lay in built-up areas.

97. Balkan Air Force was responsible for
approving all targets in the Balkans selected
for air attack. This was done by means of
daily signals to all other air forces and by
holding daily target conferences which were
attended by Intelligence and Operations Officers
of the XV Air Force, 205 Group and 37 Mili-
tary Mission. A representative of B.A.F. also
attended the i target conference of
M.AS.A.F. In this way a most satisfactory
liaison was kept up. Day attacks of the
XV Air Force and 205 Group heavy bombers
were closely co-ordinated with sweeps by B.A.F.
fighters and those of Desert Air Force.

The Bomb Line.
8. Mention has already been made of the
ifficulty of maintaining up-to-date information
on Partisan positions and intentions. This was
increased when the Russians entered Jugoslavia
and showed the same reluctance to give in-
formation as the Partisans, while their com-
munications with the Mediterranean theatre
were even more circuitous and inadequate.
These factors led to the establishment of a
bomb line which gave a very generous safety
margin except when close tactical support had
been calied for by the Partisans. In the
Russian case this was 80 miles ahead of their
last known position, unless previous clearance
was obtained through Moscow.

99. In spite of these precautions, instances
unfortunately occurred of Partisan forces being
attacked by Allied aircraft, due in most cases
to their having moved without intimation.
These, however, never led to serious reper-
cussions.
