SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 29 OCTOBER, 1951

critical. As for morale, in the words of the Ger-
man Supreme Commander: “Allied air power
was decisive in that as a result of their com-
plete lack of am air force of their own, and
without the promise of the help of a like force,
the German troops felt still more the Allied
superiority of materials.’’

345. To add to the cares of the German
commanders, because of their limited ability to
make air reconnaissance they could have had
only a very imperfect knowledge of the detailed
preparations that were being made for the offen-
sive,.while the Allied commanders, through the
unfettered freedom of air reconnaissance enjoyed
by M.A.A.F. were completely informed about
the enemy’s defences and dispositions.

346. The extreme effectiveness of the assist-
ance given by the Air Forces to the ground
forces during the battle itself is also beyond
doubt. I shall not attempt to evaluate which of
the forces made the greater contribution—
nothing would be gained by that since they were
so essentially a team, working together in per-
fect harmony, the one taking advantage of the
opportunities created by the other; but the
following points show the great importance of
the part played by air power at this time.

347. The air bombardment of the German
fixed defences in the early days of the battle
was probably the decisive factor in enabling
our ground forces to overcome them rapidly
and with a minimum of casualties. German
prisoners of war testified that the dropping of
fragmentation bombs on such a large scale
caused many casualties, and, especially in the
region of Ferrara and Lake Comacchio, greatly
reduced the resistance of the German: troops.
Again, communications between higher and
lower commanders were completely disrupted;
even radio and telephone communications were
delayed threefold. The German Supreme Com-
mander’s statement testifies to the effect of this.
‘* The smashing of all communications connec-
tions was especially disastrous. Thereafter, the
orders failed to come through at all, or failed
to come through at the right time. In any case,
the command was not able to keep itself in-
formed of the situation at the front, so that its
own decisions and commands came, for the
most part, too late.”’

348. Even when those decisions were made,
and the commands given, air power prevented
their being carried out effectively. Movement
of local reserves by day was to all intents and
purposes prohibited by the inevitably high
losses which would have followed, while move-
ment by night, though still Possible, was also
attended by heavy losses. quote the Ger-
man Supreme Commander once , again:
“Local reserves, which should have moved by
day, often arrived with great delay at the
ordered position. Even tanks could not move
by day because of the employment of fighter-
bombers. The effectiveness of fighter-bombers
lay in that their presence alone over the battle-
field paralysed every movement.”’

349. Another important point was that be-
cause of the complete air superiority enjoye' d by
the Allies, our Air Observation Post aire!
could operate completely unhindered and there-
fore with maximum efficiency. The final re-
sult was that these aircraft had only to appear
within sight of the German artillery to cause

5585

the latter to cease fire, and so in this manner,
in vital phases of the battle, an essential
element of the enemy’s defence system was
denied him. ;

350. Orderly retreats could not be conducted
by the Germans because of the air attacks on
their lines of communication in the battle area.
Through the destruction of almost all the cross-
ings of the numerous canals, trans-shipment
was made much more difficult, forcing
the enemy to leave much heavy equipment be-
hind. In that way, retreat imposed by the
ground forces was turned into a rout by the
air forces.

351. And at the Po crossings, as I have
already shown earlier on in the description of
the battle, rout was turned into destruction,
again by the use of air power.

352. Such were the effects of air power upon
the Germans. There was a reverse effect upon
our own troops. Their morale was heightened
by the constant presence of friendly aircraft,
by the complete absence of enemy aircraft, and
by the knowledge that their casualties would
always be kept to a minimum because the air
forces would be there to lend a hand with the
task.

Fina REMARKS.

353. In concluding this despatch I wish to
place on record the remarkable team work of
the three Services under the leadership of Field
Marshal Alexander, the Supreme Allied Com-
mander. The mutual understanding was com-
plete at every level within the Theatre, between
the three Services themselves as between the
Allied Forces generally. This atmosphere of the
happy family working for a single purpose,
with no thought except for the general good,
was a decisive factor in the success of the
operations.

354. Finally, I wish to pay my tribute to
the magnificent spirit shown by the officers and
airmen under my command whose achieve-
ments I have described. When I assumed com-
mand of them they had made a long journey
from Egypt to Northern Italy. Many of the
Squadrons had been engaged for over four
years in continuous and bitter fighting. The
airfield strips were far from ideal. The Heavy
Bomber Squadrons on the Foggia plain had
been living under canvas throughout the winter
in camps which were often # sea of mud. The
Maintenance and Administrative Units ‘had
also been operating under the most severe con-
ditions of weather and accommodation.

355. Yet the spirit of all ranks in every unit
remained at the highest level. The one desire
of the Squadrons was to get to grips with the
enemy, and if he was not to be found in the air
they sought him out relentlessly on the ground.
The maintenance personnel in Squadrons and
in supporting units toiled ceaselessly to keep
the aircraft flying at the very high rate of effort
that the battle demanded. It was a joy and an
inspiration to command such a force, whose
mastery over the enemy resulted in so complete
a victory.

Guy GarRop,
Air Chief Marshal,
lately C.-in-C., Royal Air Force,
Mediterranean and Middle East.

August, 1946.
