5570

Priority was therefore assigned to such attacks
and in practice they were normally limited
to attacks on jet-propelled fighter installa-
tions.

(f) Attacks against communications outside
Germany. Attacks against these targets in-
cluded the following, the priority of which
was determined by reconnaissance and
other intelligence and which was specified by
special instructions from Headquarters
M.A.A.F. :

(x) Railway communications between

S.E. Germany and the Danubian Plains.

(2) Railway communications between

South Germany and Austria, and Italy.

(3) Communications in Jugoslavia.
(4) Communications in Italy.

Mediterranean Allied Tactical Air Force.

150. The general commitments of the Tactical
Air Force for March remained basically the
same as in the previous two months, Their
priority and scope were:— —

(a) the disruption of enemy lines of com-
munication;

(b) the destruction of enemy supplies and
dumps;

(c) the support of ground operations by air
attacks;

(d) reconnaissance duties;

(e) counter air force operations and provi-
sion of air protection over the forward areas;

(f) the dropping of-supplies to Italian
Partisans and other Special Duties operations.

151. The Commanding General, M.A.T.A.F.,
was responsible for the selection of targets for
offensive air operations in Italy, and no targets
in Italy were to be attacked by other forma-
tions except upon his request or approval. He
maintained at H.Q., M.A.S.A.F., and H.Q.,
M.A.C.A.F., a list of targets from which in-
dividual objectives could be selected by them
when an opportunity for attack occurred. If
M.A.T.A.F. required priority assistance from
M.A.S.A.F., a request was made to Head-
quarters M.A.A.F. for approval.

152. Owing to the negligible effort of the
German Air Force, the counter air force opera-
tions and air protection for our forward areas
were only minor activities. The major objec-
tive was to reduce the enemy army’s ability to
fight by attacks on his lines of communications
and supply dumps. Reconnaissance work was a
constant need and was handled by the
specialised squadrons concerned.

The Balkan Air Force,

153. The function of Balkan Air Force during
March was primarily to give all possible air
support to Marshal Tito’s Jugoslav Army of
National Liberation, in both bombing and
Special Duties operations. Details of this have
been given in Part III, which deals specifically
with the subject. In addition, B.A.F. was
responsible for the selection of targets for air
operations in Jugoslavia, and the communica-
tion of this list to M.A.S.A.F., M.A.T.AF.,
and M.A.C.A.F. When the other air forces
found an opportunity to operate against pre-
viously accepted targets in Jugoslavia con-
sistent with their other priorities; they confirmed
with B.A.F, that the targets selected were still

SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 29 OCTOBER, 1951

cleared for attack. If B.A.F. desired either to
solicit additional assistance from M.A.S.A.F.
or to obtain a higher priority on accepted
targets, it forwarded a request to Headquarters
M.A.A.F. for decision.

Mediterranean Allied Coastal Air Force.

154. The primary task of the Mediterranean
Allied Coastal Air Force continued to be the
protection of our own shipping, the attacking
of enemy shipping of all types and the provi-
sion of air sea rescue facilities. In addition
to this, tactical sorties were flown, giving assist-
ance to Balkan Air Force activities in Northern
Jugoslavia, and to M.A.T.A.F.’s programme
of interdiction in the western part of the Po
Valley.

OPERATIONAL EFFORT PRIOR TO THE ITALIAN

OFFENSIVE.

155. An analysis of the bombing effort of the °
Command during March and early April shows
that there were four broad objectives.

(a) The completion of the destruction of
the enemy’s oil resources.

(6) Attacks on communications in South-
East Europe in order to aid the Russian drive
into Austria and Northern Jugoslavia. -

(c) Interdiction of the enemy’s communi-
cations, leading into, and inside Italy, and
the destruction of his supply dumps and
installations, in preparation for the army’s
final offensive,

(@ Support for the offensive of the Fourth
Jugoslav Army.

The first three tasks are dealt with in detail
below, while the fourth has been dealt with
in Part III.

Oil Targets.

156. By the middle of March, 1945, the air
campaign against enemy oil targets had
achieved almost complete success. Begun
nearly a year before, as a co-ordinated
offensive with Bomber Command and _ the
VIIIth Air Force operating from the United
Kingdom, it had, assisted by the advances of
the Russian armies, so nearly completed its
task, that there were by March, 1945, only six
known active plants within range of M.A.S.A.F.
Of these the most important was that at Rub-
land, seventy miles south of Berlin and over
700 miles from M.A.S.A.F, bases. In the third
week in March, it was attacked three times by
M.A.S.A.F. Fortresses with over one thousand
tons of bombs, and successfully neutralised.
In March also, attacks were made on the already
damaged refineries in the Vienna area, and on
two small refineries in the Western Hungarian
oil region.

157. These raids brought the offensive to a
successful conclusion, for on March 26th, the
petrol output of refineries still in enemy hands
and within range of M.A.S.A.F. was estimated
to be, for all practical purposes, nil; and during
April, it was judged to be a waste of effort to
make any further raids on oil targets from
Italian bases.

158. The overall result of the Anglo-American
two-way bombing and of Allied ground ad-
vances by the end of March, even allowing
for some small production from new under-
ground plants, was to reduce the enemy’s pro-
duction of liquid fuels and lubricants to less
