5566

Operations with Light Naval Forces.

roo. The air force role in these operations was
to silence the large coastal defence (C.D.) bat-
teries (especially on Cherso, Rab, and Lussin
islands) by intensive air attack so that Naval
craft could bombard from close range in safety.
These batteries consisted of guns up to 150 mm.
in calibre, and with all aircraft often operating
from the same airfield, Biferno, it was possible
to carry out several very effective attacks.

ror. Marauders and Baltimores attacked from
medium level, while R.P. Beaufighters, with
Mustangs as anti-flak escort, come in at low
level in a co-ordinated attack. These batteries
were also attacked from low level by Mustangs
carrying Napalm fire bombs. As a result, at
least four major C.D. batteries were silenced,
thus permitting the Navy to bombard the
anchorages and to operate their M.T.B.’s close
inshore to disrupt the enemy’s coastal shipping
routes.

Co-operation by M.A.T.A.F.

102. When operations in Italy permitted,
M.A.T.A.F. allotted a force of eight squadrons
for operations over the Balkans, and this was
supplemented by additional squadrons when
weather conditions were ynfavourable in Italy.
They were normally given a specific area in
which to sweep roads and railways. On occa-
sions, Mustangs were asked to take on par-
ticular targets such as bridges, as B.A.F.’s own
aircraft of this type could not carry 1,000 Ib.

mbs.

ARMY.
The ground position at the beginning of the
offensive.

103. The withdrawal of the German Army
Group ‘‘E”’ from the Aegean, Greece and
Albania had begun in late 1944. The move-
ment of the German 21 Mountain Corps from
Northern Albania and Montenegro into Croatia
was one of the major parts of this withdrawal,
and by the end of March, 1945, the Corps had
reached Sarajevo and were in the process of
withdrawing northwards towards Brod and
thence to Zagreb. There had been a general
thinning out of the German forces on the west
coast, and following the Jugoslav Army’s suc-
cess in pursuing the retreating Germans, it re-
mained to carry out a final offensive to clear
the rest of Northern Jugoslavia of the enemy.

Preparations for the Offensive.

104. Consideration had at one time been
given to the possibility of launching an am-
bitious operation from the Zadar area using
considerable forces from the 15th Army Group,
which would be aimed at Trieste and Ljubljana
Gap and which would be made in conjunction
with an offensive on the Italian front. How-
ever, when at the end of February, 1945, the
Supreme Allied Commander had a long-post-
poned meeting with Marshal Tito no further
mention of the proposal for this operation was
made. The r5th Army Group had recently lost
several divisions to the Western Front and,
apart from any strategic considerations, there
were no troops to spare for diversions across
the Adriatic. Instead, it was agreed that a
large scale offensive should be carried out in
Dalmatia by units of the Jugoslav Fourth Army

Tae OFFENSIVE BY THE JuGosLAV FourTH

SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 29 OCTOBER, 1951

under General Drapsin, which was composed
of the former 8 Corps and 11 Corps of the
ugoslav Army of National Liberation. The
t object of the operations was to clear the
enemy from the Gospic and Bihac areas and
then to liberate the whole of the northern
Dalmatian coast and islands.

105. In his talks with Marshal Tito, the
Supreme Allied Commander promised that the
maximum air support shouldbe given by B.A.F.
for this operation, subject to its other commit-
ments in the Balkans, that Allied naval craft
should co-operate as far as possible, and that
the maximum quantity of supplies should be
sent to the various Jugoslav formations con-
cerned in the operation.

106. The plans for the original ambitious
operation from the Zadar area had included the
establishment of an air base there. The plan
for the setting-up of this air base was called
Operation ‘‘ Accomplish,’’ and was completed
by the 7th February after protracted and diffi-
cult negotiations with the Jugoslavs. In the
meantime, by the end of January, a refuelling
and rearming party had been sent to Prkos
airfield at Zadar, mainly with the object of
providing for Allied aircraft which landed there
in distress.

x07. When the plan for an offensive by the
Jugoslav Fourth Army was decided upon,
arrangements were at once made for providing
the maximum air support possibie.
Air Adviser was attached to General Drapsin’s
Headquarters, and R.A.F. liaison officers were
attached to each of the Partisan Corps con-
cerned in the offensive in order to supplement
the work of the ordinary British liaison officers’
I did not consider it advisable, however, to
build up the Air Forces at Zadar itself as had
been envisaged under Operation ‘‘ Accom-
plish,”’ even though this would have been very
desirable, because of the danger of an attack
against the base by German land forces,

108. However, when the offensive started on
rgth March, it very soon became evident that
it was going very well and that the risk of in-
cursion by German land and sea forces had
considerably diminished. Accordingly, on
zand March I pressed the Supreme ‘ALied Com-
mander to approve a modified form of Opera-
tion ‘‘ Accomplish ’? named Operation ‘‘ Bing-
ham,”’ and he agreed that this operation should
take place at the earliest possible date. It was
therefore started on the 2nd April, and as a
result No. 281 Wing, which comprised all the
short range single-engined fighter squadrons in
B.A.F. except the Italian ones, was fully estab-
lished at Zadar by the end of April. The effect
of this was to enable B.A.F. to give an in-
greased and closer Air Support to Marshal Tito’s

forces,

1og. A naval agreement had been signed in
Belgrade in January which permitted the use
of Zadar as a base for light naval craft. In
the middle of February units of L.F.A., includ-
ing one squadron of the Long Range Desert
Group, and one squadron of the Special Boating
Service, were sent to Zadar. The establishment
of an air base there resulted in a rather com-
plex problem of inter-service co-ordination.
which was solved by the creation of a head-
quarters to control raiding operations involving
all three services, called Combined Operations,
Zadar (C.O.Z.A.).
