5558

6. The period falls into two main parts.
The first is from 16th March to 8th April, the
time from my assumption of command to the
beginning of the final ground offensive in Italy,
and the second is from 9th April to 2nd May,
in which the final Italian offensive took place.

7. There was one event, however, which was
taking place during the whole of the period,
and therefore cannot conveniently be dealt with
in the arrangement of parts I have described;
T refer to the offensive by Marshal Tito’s Fourth
Army in Jugoslavia. It began before the
Allied offensive in Italy and continued a few
days after the German surrender in Italy.
Because of this, I have devoted an early part
of the despatch entirely to this subject and this
has enabled me also to describe, more fully
than would otherwise have been possible, the
special organisation of command of the Balkan

ir Force, and the special problems with which
it had to contend.

Part I.
CONDITIONS IN THE MEDITERRANEAN
THEATRE ON MARCH 16TH, 1945.
The Ground Situation.

8. The enemy ground forces in the Italian
theatre consisted of the German roth and 14th
Armies comprising some twenty-five divisions,
which were stretched along a line reaching
toughly from Lake Comacchio on the
Adriatic Coast through Vergato, South of
Bologna, to Pietrasanta on the west coast.
This was the line which had been finally stabi-
lised after the Allied Offensive in the summer
of 1944 had battered its way from Cassino up
the Italian peninsula, and had only just failed
to overflow into the Po Valley. The Fifth Army
had been unable to reach Bologna, before winter
conditions had made operations in the moun-
tains impossible, and the Eighth Army, when
it reached the Po Valley on the East coast
after long and hard fighting, found itself
confronted by a series of formidably defended
river lines which it was unable to pierce with-
out sustaining very heavy casualties.

g. It did not prove possible to make any
further progress during the winter. Both
Allied Armies were very tired after a most
exhausting campaign, while the enemy had
managed to improve his supply position since
he had been falling back on his dumps.
Moreover, the Allied ground forces were
weakened by the withdrawal of divisions to
reinforce other theatres, with the consequence
that a large number of anti-aircraft gunners
had to be trained as infantry, and this required
time.

Infantry
I5TH ARMY GROUP ... tee . 82,100
IOTH AND I4TH GERMAN ARMIES... 74,500

SUPPLEMENT to tae LONDON GAZETTE, 29 OCTOBER, 1951

Io. It was decided at the beginning of
January 1945 that the 15th Army Group would
plan for an all-out offensive in the early
Spring. The date of the attack would be at
a time when good weather could be expected
for air and armoured operations and when
both armies could deploy their maximum
strength against the enemy, having rested those
divisions required for the assault and built
up adequate reserves of supplies and a great
superiority of tanks and guns.

11. To the Allies it was clear that the enemy
would at all costs stand and fight where he
stood. He was forced to adopt this attitude
by the complete superiority of the Allies in
the air*. He dared not retreat since air action
had deprived him of Practically. all means of
transporting fuel from Germany into Italy, and
any considerable withdrawal would have meant
the expenditure of almost all of his slender
fuel reserves. In any event he could not afford
to abandon without a fight territory whose
possession would have enabled us to move our
bomber bases so much nearer to Germany
itself. Furthermore, any large scale movement
would have been extremely hazardous, as he
would have laid himself open to intensive and
continuous air attack both by day and by
night.

12. By the beginning of April the Allied
armies were ready once again to resume the
offensive, rested and re-equipped. The enemy
on the other hand, constantly harassed by
air attack throughout the Winter and Spring,
had had but little rest, and only a trickle of
new equipment had come to him, so that he
was forced to rely mainly on such of his old
material as the Allied Air Forces had left him
intact.

13. It was, of course, obvious to the enemy
that the Allies intended to launch a major
offensive in the near future. The disposition
of his forces suggested that he was awake to
the possibility of amphibious operations at the
head of the Adriatic, combined with a frontal
attack. He had split his mobile reserve of
two divisions accordingly to deal with either
or both eventualities. He also showed his
appreciation of the vulnerability of the Argenta-
Ferrara axis, and of the area West of Bologna
where the Allies were in a favourable position
to carry out an outflanking thrust towards
Modena.

14. The following table gives some figures
to illustrate the comparative strengths of the
Allied and German resources employed in the
opening phases of the offensive: —

Artillery Tanks
Hvy. Med.  ‘ Fid. Med. Light .
134 492,Ss«1,424 2,426 612
25 250 7 200 _

Norte.—The above figures do not show the number of men manning the Artillery and the Tanks. Moreover,
they do not include men and equipment not actually employed in a fighting réle in the opening phases of the

ttle.

The American Fifth and British Eighth
Armies comprised seventeen divisions and ten
brigades of many  nationalities—British,
American, New Zealand, South African,
Indian, Palestinian, Polish and Brazilian—while
four Italian Gruppi also played an important
part.

The Air Situation.
15. On March 16th the enemy in the Italian

theatre could put into the air at most 130 air-
craft. The Allies could put 4,000. Such
figures speak for themselves—the enemy was
outnumbered in the air by approximately 30 to
x. Air superiority—which is nowadays the
essential pre-requisite to victory on the ground
——had been attained in North Africa and never
‘again relinquished, for although enemy air

* See paras. 15-17 below.
