SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 29 OCTOBER, 195!

than 20 per cent. of the April, 1944, level, and
of petrol to about 10 per cent. It can be truly
said that the attacks on the enemy’s fuel pro-
duction constituted one of the most successful
air offensives ever waged.

Assistance to the Russians.

159. In November, 1944, it became evident
that the advance of the Soviet forces through
Hungary was destined to be one of the decisive
thrusts of the war. It was equally clear that
an excellent opportunity was presented to
M.AS.A.F. of using its striking power to aid
our Russian Ally, by limiting the supply and
reinforcement of the defending Axis troops
south of the Tatra mountains. To achieve this
aim, the air offensive had to dislocate the
enemy’s railway systems in Austria, Western
Hungary, and Northern Jugoslavia. Although
considerable damage had already been inflicted
on vulnerable points of these systems, a far
more comprehensive programme of air attacks
was now necessary, but before this could be
implemented, an exact picture had to be drawn
up of the whole flow of enemy traffic to the
south-eastern front. Before the end of 19044,
by means of constant photographic reconnais-
sance and reports from ground agents and
prisoners of war, the necessary information had
been obtained and collated.

160. The first requirement of the Russian
High Command was the dislocation of the rail-
ways from Linz and Vienna to Zagreb and the
connecting lines to North-East Italy. . This
phase lasted approximately from the beginning
of 1945 to 23rd February, 1945. Thereafter
an additional commitment was the destruction
of Western Hungarian marshalling yards and
railway targets in Northern Jugoslavia, in order
to disiocate the enemy troop movement north-
wards across the Drava river.

The Main Targets.

16x. Before considering the implementation
of the plan to aid the Russian armies, it is
necessary to give a brief survey of the principal
communication targets involved.

162. The key target of the whole railway net-
work was the complex of marshalling yards
immediately to the south-east of Vienna. Before
the air offensive began in earnest, most of the
military supplies and material from the Reich
and Czechoslovakia were handled in these
yards, which had ample facilities for the pur-
pose. Of slightly lower priority, but equally
large and complex, was the railway centre at
Linz, further to the west. And between the two
were the spacious yards at Amstettin, capable
of dealing with all military traffic and un-
hampered by industrial commitments.

163. Southwards on the line from Vienna to
Zagreb were four important railway centres at
Wiener Neustadt, Bruck, Graz and Maribor,
which had large classification yards with full
facilities and repair depots.

164. East of the Vienna-Zagreb route the
lines from the Austrian capital to Budapest were
serviced by the Bratislava and Ersekujvar
centres, north of the Danube, and those at
Hegyeshalom and Komarom to the south of
the river.

165. Further south, a number of minor lines
branched east from Wiener Neustadt and Graz,
passing through the centres at Sopron and
Szombathely.

5571

166. Complementary to the major targets
were minor yards and sidings along the various
lines, while rail traffic offered tempting targets
to M.A.S.A.F. fighters.

The Air Effort in March.

167. In January and February well over
£3,000 tons of bombs were dropped in meeting
this commitment, and March saw a further
stepping up of the effort. In that month, some
18,000 tons were dropped on Austrian,
Bavarian, Hungarian and Jugoslav railway
communications in order to aid the Red Army
drive into Austria and Jugoslavia.

168. On about one third of the day missions,
visual bombing was possible and the accuracy
achieved was exceptional. Night bomber raids
by No. 205 Group added to the disrupticn
caused by the Fifteenth Air Force attacks.

169. In addition to the continued policing of
the Vienna-Graz-Zagreb route, in answer to
Russian requests, M.A.S.A.F. now intensified its
attacks on the western Hungarian marshalling
yards and northern Jugoslav railway targets
so as to dislocate the enemy’s northward move-
ment across the Drava.

170. In neutralising the Germans’ forward
marshalling yards in western Hungary nearly
2,500 tons of bombs were dropped at
Hegyeshalom, Komarom, Sopron, Szombathely
and Ersekujvar (Nove Zamky). A further
132 tons were dropped on the Bratislava yards,
just inside Czechoslovakia.

17i. Meanwhile, in completing the disrup-
tion of the railway communications in Austria,
southern Germany and northern Jugoslavia,
MAS.AE. dropped some 15,000 tons of
bombs.

172. Of the fifteen bombing attacks de-
livered against the Vienna-Graz-Zagreb line the
most important were five directed against
Wiener Neustadt which, except for Bruck, was
the only remaining railway centre on the line
with a large and relatively intact marshalling
capacity. The 1,743 tons of bombs dropped on
this target left the yards severely damaged and
completely blocked. Three heavy attacks were
also made on the crowded yards at Amstettin,
which had become the main centre for the
sorting of traffic after the previous month’s
crippling attacks on Linz and Vienna, and these
likewise resulted in the destruction of installa-
tions and the blocking of the yards with the
wreckage of rolling stock.

173. Meanwhile, the air offensive was con-
tinued against railway targets at Vienna, Linz
and Graz at high intensity. Among the many
other railway targets attacked the strongest
efforts were directed against those at Wels,
Villach, Bruck, Steyr, Gmund, St. Veit,
Klagenfurt and St. Polten in Austria; at Muldort
and Landshut in Bavaria; and Maribor, Zagreb
and Dobova in northern Jugoslavia.

174. No. 205 Group again supplemented the
havoc wrought by the United States day

bombers by effective night attacks.

During the first seventeen days of March,
also, M.A.S.A.F. fighters flew 333 effective
sorties on straffing missions, which met with
excellent results, particularly in the destruction
of locomotives.
