5582

and disorganised to prevent the Allied ground
forces’ quick pursuit across the river in
strength, and in causing the collapse which
followed.

310. (Confirmation of this is given by the
statement by General von Senger, commanding
the German XIV Panzer Corps “It was
the bombing of the River Po crossings that
finished us. We could have withdrawn success-
fully with normal rear-guard action despite the
heavy pressure, but due to the destruction of
the ferries and river crossings we lost all our
equipment. North of the River we were no
longer an Army ”’.

3x1. Similarly General von Vietinghoff, Ger-
man Supreme Commander, said: ‘‘ The cros-
sings of the Reno and the Po Rivers were
decisively influenced by the employment of the
Allied Air Forces. The smashing of almost all
ferries and bridges made an ordered retreat
across the Po no longer possible. The troops
amassed at the crossing points and often had
to swim to the other bank without heavy
weapons ’’.

The Final Stages of the Battle. 25th April to
and May.

312. On the 25th, both Eighth and Fifth
Armies were largely across the Po. From their
bridgeheads, a series of columns were sent
tacing northwest, north and northeast, and
before long had severed the escape route into
the foothills of the Alps north of Milan, so that
those elements of the German army which had
managed to get across the Po to the west of the
main Allied crossings, soon found themselyes
confined in what was, for all practical pur-
poses, a very large prisoner of war camp. In
northeast Italy, on the rst May, New Zealand
forces had linked up with the forces of Marshal
Tito in the Trieste area.

313. Towards the end of April, with only
four German Divisions left which bore any
resemblance to intact fighting formations, it
was clear that any attempt to hold the Southern
Redoubt was hopeless, particularly as Army
Group ‘‘G’’ in Southern Germany was also
on the point of collapse. One course alone was
open to the German Commander—uncondi-
tional surrender. The surrender instrument was
signed at Field Marshal Alexander’s Head-
quarters at the Royal Palace of Caserta on the
2gth April, and the “‘ cease fire ’’ took effect
on the 2nd May.

Air Effort in the final stages of the Batile. 25th
April to 2nd May.

314. The outstanding air activity in support
of the Army’s pursuit of the defeated enemy
was an operation named ‘‘ Corncob,” which
aimed at blocking or delaying his retreat into
north-eastern Italy by destroying the road
bridges over the Adige and Brenta Rivers.

315. On the 2oth April, there were nine road
bridges serviceable across the Adige between
Verona and the Adriatic coast. On that day,
272 M.A.S.A.F. heavy bombers destroyed three
of these at Rovigo, Barbuglio and Lusia. On
the 23rd April another attack was delivered
by M.A.S.A.F, aircraft which put out of action
the bridges at Badia Polesine, Legnago, Bona-
vigo, Alboredo, and Zevio. The ninth bridge,
at Cavarzere, was destroyed on the 24th April
by Tactical Air Force medium bombers.

- 316. With all the road bridees down over
‘the Adige river the retreating Germans sought

SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 29 OCTOBER, 1951

to use ferry crossings instead. They were pre-
vented from doing this to any large extent by
constant patrols of Desert Air Force aircraft
from the 24th to the 26th April. On the 26th,
Spitbombers found well over one hundred
motor vehicles waiting to be ferried across the
river and immediately attacked them. The
damage inflicted was, however, curtailed by
the onset of bad weather,

317. The second phase of Operation ‘‘ Corn-
cob ’’ was the interdiction of road bridges across
the River Brenta, between Bassano and the
east coast. Along this stretch of the river there
were still ten bridges serviceable for motor
vehicle traffic. Bad weather interfered with
the execution of the plan, but nevertheless from
23rd to 26th April, seven of the ten targets
were cut or blocked either M.A.S.A.F.
heavy bombers or M.A.T.A.F, medium bom-
bers. The targets affected were the three road
bridges at Padua, the Chioggia railway bridge
(which had been converted for the use of road
traffic), the diversion around the previously
destroyed bridge at Friola, the bridge at Corte,
and a bridge west of Chioggia.

318. During the early days of the retreat,

hter-bombers by day and night intruders by
night continued to attack enemy movement
wherever it could be found. After the 27th
of April, it could be said that the Air Force’s
task was finished. The Army was moving so
fast against little resistance that pre-arranged
targets were no longer possible. In fact, the
ground forces did not meet any defence which
required bombing from the air, and the battle,
such as it was, had passed out of the range of
the Spitbombers.

319. After the unconditional surrender took
effect on the 2nd of May, sweeps were made in
the Trieste area'on the 3rd of May to impress
unruly elements there, and prevent any inci-
dent on a large scale arising from the Jugoslav
claim to the city.

Interdiction of Railways during the period of
the Offensive.

320. Although the blockade of Northern
Italy by the disruption of the frontier railway
routes continued to be an important item of
the air programme throughout April, the satis-
factory interdiction prevailing as the result of
the previous long offensive made it possible
to reduce the M.A.T.A.F. effort against these
distant rail targets as soon as the ground con-
flict re-opened.

321. The most striking feature of the attacks
on railways was now the big effort of the
M.A.S.A.F. bombers, which operated against
targets nominated by M.A.T.A.F., and thus
allowed the latter to concentrate primarily on
operations directly connected with the battle.
Following their big effort of 8th April, 265 U.S.
heavies four days later hit rail targets across
the Venetian plain and along the Brenner
toute. Another large scale assault, prior to
the enemy’s retreat, was made on the zoth by
500 escorted American heavy bombers who
attacked the Brenner route bridges and mar-
shalling yards.

322. When it became evident that the enemy
was being driven from the Po Valley a policy
was formulated of conserving railway facilities
in North Italy. Only targets definitely associ-
ated with the supply or withdrawal of the
