5578

fell outside the target areas. A message of
thanks from the Army was received, which said
‘‘Bombing quite remarkable and accuracy
very impressive.’’

- 256. In addition to No. 205 Group’s attack
on the Santerno defences, the night intruders
of Desert Air Force—Bostons, Baltimores and
Mosquitoes—flew the record number of 169
sorties, attacking gun positions from Castel
Bolognese to Massa Lombarda, watching for
any movement on the roads in the Po Valley,
or on the Po River itself, and bombing strong-
points in the battle area.

Day 10th April—Eighth Army Front.

257. The following morning, again preceded
by a heavy air assault by fighter-bombers, the
infantry pushed forward to the line of the Lugo
Canal, and by mid-day had reached it in
strength. New Zealand troops attacked across
the Lugo Canal soon after mid-day and by the
evening had reached the Santerno River; at
the same time Lugo town itself was captured.
Further South the Polish Corps also reached the
Lugo Canal.

258. In the afternoon the XVth Air Force
made an even greater effort in support of the
ground forces, despatching 1,261 bombers and
fighters to continue the attack on the Santerno
defences begun by No. 205 Group the previous
night. The object was again to disorganise the
enemy and attack troop concentrations, gun
positions and defence installations in the area
immediately ahead of the Eighth Army.

259. Desert Air Force flew 662 sorties during
the day of which 608 were in close support of
V Corps and Polcorps. Four squadrons of
Marauders of the S.A.A.F. bombed gun areas
at Menate, near the South shore of Lake
Comacchio.

260. On the Polcorps sector, attacks were
made at Solarolo, Gaiano, Bagnara and against
gun areas on both sides of the Santerno. The
Mordano bridge over the Santerno was bombed
by Thunderbolts, scoring four direct hits on
the bridge as well as others on the approaches.

Night toth-11th April—Eighth Army Front.

261. Desert Air Force continued its watch
over the battlefield during the night, but after
attacks had been made on the primary targets
such as headquarters buildings, gun areas, fac-
tories and dumps, the ensuing reconnaissance
revealed very little movement, and what little
there was appeared very scattered.

262. During the early hours of the morning
an attack by the army was launched on the
extreme right flank from the bridgehead across
the Reno gained in the operations preliminary
to the main assault and reached a point some
five miles south-east of Argenta, to the north of
Route 16. The enemy reacted very strongly as
this was a dangerous threat to his key towns of
Bastia, Argenta and Ferrara, guarding the
Argenta gap, and the way to the Po Valley
along Route 16.

Day 11th April—8th Army Front.

., 263. During the day and through thé follow-
ing night the Eighth Army fought for the
Santerno crossings and by the morning of the
ath April had considerable forces across the
river. During the day 824 sorties were flown
by Desert Air Force. The majority of these
were close support missions under “’ Rover ”’

SUPPLEMENT to tHE LONDON GAZETTE, 29 OCTOBER, 1951

control, against targets in the immediate battle
area, nominated by the Army. Spitfires and
Mustangs were constantly straffing enemy posi-
tions. Search by tactical reconnaissance air-
craft for enemy movement in and behind the
battle area again revealed very little. In fact
his powers of movement had been practically
destroyed by our previous heavy air attacks in
preparation for this battle. Artillery recon-
naissance aircraft secured the engagement of
hostile batteries throughout the day, and photo
reconnaissance aircraft covered the battle area,
Ferrara, Rovigo marshalling yards and any port
activity in the North. The day’s activity was
typical of the work carried out by the Air Force
during the offensive.

Night 11th/12th April_8th Army Front.

264. Further bombing was carried out by
No. 205 Group when 225 tons of bombs were
dropped on enemy concentrations, defences and
dumps in the Bastia area, some two to three
thousand yards in front of our own troops.
The success of these attacks especially on the
enemy’s communications caused him to aban-
don Highway 16 where it crosses the Reno and
divert his withdrawal to a point ten miles
north-west of Bastia.

265. Desert Air Force night intruders con-
tinued their attacks im the battle area and
communications behind it.

Day 12th April_8ih Army Front.

266. During the day the bridgeheads already
gained across the Santerno were consolidated
into one, and a reserve division moved up
through its northern part with the object of
producing a local pincer movement against
Bastia in conjunction with the force attacking
north of Route 16.

267. Further south, Polish forces attacked
up Route g, capturing Castel Bolognese and
in the late afternoon, Mordano on the west
bank of the Santerno,

268. On this day the majority of the 729
sorties flown by D.A.F. helped the New
Zealand and Polish Forces to consolidate and
enlarge their bridgeheads across the Santerno
River. One hundred and six sorties were
directed against targets in the immediate battle
area. The usual round of attacks on gun posi-
tions and on tanks took place with considerable
success.

Night 12th/13th April—8th Army Front.

269. During the night No. 205 Group
attacked the key communications centre of
Argenta on Route 16, which was now being
threatened by the Eighth Army’s thrust north
and south of the road. The destruction was
very great; roads were cratered and blocked
with rubble thus impeding the enemy’s use of
this line of communication.

270. Bostons, Baltimores and Mosquitoes
continued their vigil throughout the night,
patrolling the battle area, the Po River cross-
ings and intruding further ‘North.

Day 13th April_8th Army Front.

271. At dawn on the 13th April yet another .
amphibious assault was launched behind the
enemy’s left flank on the north-western shore
of Lake Comacchio. To the south of Route 16
an attack was begun on Conselice, and further

progress was made north and north-west of
Massa Lombarda.
