SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 5 APRIL, 1951

height a minimum of 50 miles from the target.
This distance, allowing an average speed of
160 knots and a descent from 12,000 to 8,000
feet, would only take 19 minutes.

5. Approach to Target

About 20 miles from the target the Strike
Leader requested the Fireflies (INDEFATI-
GABLE) to go ahead and strafe the balloons
which could be seen flying in the target area at
about 3,000 feet. Unfortunately, owing to
delays in the carrier, the aircraft still had not
joined the main strike. I judged their time of
joining to be 0806 and almost immediately
afterwards they went ahead to strafe their
special target. I do not think they heard the
request for the balloons to be strafed.

At about 0808 the enemy A.A. defences
opened fire whilst the strike ‘was still out of
range, indicating that they had had warning
of our approach.

Almost immediately afterwards the escort was
engaged by an estimated 25 Tojo fighters,
although I myself only counted about 12 at the
time. Their initial height was 13,000-15,000 feet.

6. The Attack

There seemed to be a rather long delay after
the enemy had opened fire until the first bombs
fell (about six minutes). When surprise has
obviously not been achieved, as in this case,
the time interval must be cut down to a mini-
mum and the bombing become more concen-
trated.

I did not see the Fireflies attack, but the
first group of bombs to fall struck several oil
tanks with the inevitable result; it seemed
that all subsequent attacks had the same effect.
The target of No. 1 Wing (INDOMITABLE
and VICTORIOUS) appeared well hit. No. 2
Wing (ILLUSTRIOUS and INDEFATI-
GABLE) appeared to have destroyed only half
of theirs. During this period, when not engaged
with enemy fighters or occupied in avoiding
predicted flak, I was able to secure a series of
oblique photographs of the bombing. When I
finally left the target area (about 0823), the
Avengers were just about to leave the rendez-
vous and I did not see them again.

Throughout the attack the enemy had just
sufficient fighters to saturate the escort. Enemy
pilots showed as much contempt for Japanese
heavy A.A. as we did and fights were raging
all over the target area. It was almost funny
to see the aircraft scrapping and all the while
the A.A. bursting at all heights up to 15,000
feet. As far as I know no one was lost by
this fire and very few damaged.

The presence of 3 or 4 twin-engined aircraft
seemed to indicate some air-ground control of
A.A. or fighters. No noticeable difference was
observed after three of these twin-engined air-
craft had been shot down.

R/T discipline during this air battle was
good. No report was received from Force X-
Ray. An immense column of black smoke to
the north-west of the target indicated their pas-
sage, but when I left they still had not arrived
at Talangbetoetoe. Thus, although they
achieved very ‘excellent results, they wéfé ‘téo
late to be of any material help to the strike.

1809

7. Withdrawal

Once again the withdrawal was insufficiently
protected by the escort. The Fireflies appeared
to be the only aircraft there and they were
unable to prevent several attacks by fighters
taking place. There is no doubt more of the
escort could have got there and discipline on
this point must be tightened. At 0825 the
enemy fighters appear to have been ordered
off, as no further attacks developed after this
time and the escort quickly formed up on the
strike. In my attempt to rejoin the formation,
my flight became. engaged with four Tojos of
which I: shot down two and the remaining two
in my flight damaged one each. :

8, Return to Base

Return was without incident. The top cover
(VICTORIOUS) dispersed two Tojos which
were attempting to shadow the formation. The
fleet was several miles to the north of her
advertised position. Attempts to home by
beacon, as usual, failed. The reason for this
continued failure of the beacon is not clearly
understood. A very large number of aviators
report failure each time with a lucky one or
two reporting success. At any rate this matter
needs most careful attention. At 0928 the
group broke up for landing which was carried
out speedily and with skill.

9. General

T think this has been one of the better strikes
the Fleet Air Arm has ever accomplished. +

There was some initial confusion in the
operation orders since most places in South
Sumatra appear to have more than one name.

Maps were good and briefing excellent.
Despite the unwelcome appearance of enemy
fighters, balloons and intense A.A., the
Avengers wrote off a good 60 per cent. of their
targets and, now we know the form, succeed-
ing strikes should be better still. '

(Signed) R. C. Hay,
Major, R.M.

REPORT OF AIR CO-ORDINATOR ON
SECOND STRIKE '

I have the honour to submit the following
report on the strike against the oil refineries
at Songei Gerong, Palembang on the morning
of Monday, 29th January, 1945. .

2. Form Up

In rather doubtful weather, carriers com-
menced flying off at 0640 ; about 0710 visibility
improved sufficiently for all groups to be
observed at the same time.

At 0718 the Strike Leader commenced his
left hand circuit of the fleet. All units were
ready for him, and joined up promptly. At
0729 the complete strike was all formed up
and on the east side of the fleet, ready to take
departure. Alas, the Strike -Leader once
again, for no- known: reason, made -a- 360
degree orbit. I decided against breaking R/T
silence,- which was*my error. Anyway, the
Flagship came up” and ordered -departure to
be taken but it was too late. The result of
