1808

Corsairs were vectored out to intercept and
got within three miles of the bogey. These
aircraft had however been brought down to
6,000 feet as it was thought the enemy was
diving. After this failure the fighters were
recalled in order to land them on before dark-
ness fell. The two last Corsairs landed on
about 20 minutes after sunset with clouds
reducing the rapidly failing light.

57. The enemy aircraft remained in the
vicinity until about 1910. It is doubtful if the
fleet was sighted but the enemy appeared to
be aware of our approximate position.

58. The fleet was steering a course towards
Ceylon while this aircraft was in contact.

SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 5 APRIL, 1951

Third Oiling and Passage to Fremantle

59. Force 63 proceeded westward at 23
knots throughout the night of 29th-30th Janu-
ary in order to join the oilers sufficiently early
on 30th January to complete fuelling on that
day. Fuelling was started at 1315 and was
finished by 2200, all ships with the. exception
of VICTORIOUS and ILLUSTRIOUS either
filling up or topping up for the passage to
Fremantle.

60. URSA, after oiling, was detached to take
messages to Cocos Island for transmission and
to proceed independently. '

61. Force 63 arrived at Fremantle at 0600
local time 4th February.

APPENDIX TO NARRATIVE
Statement of Results
Bomb Damage to specific buildings confirmed by photographs
(Photography ceased on account of smoke before raid was completed.) .

(a) Pladjoe
Target
Crude distilleries and run down tanks
Reforming unit os bes ws
Redistillation unit
+ Cracking unit

Distillation units... we wn
Main boiler and electric power house

(b) Songei Gerong

Boiler and electric power houses ...

1,000 Ib. cracking plant

Fractionating columns

Coke stills... we wee

Pipe stills and re-run stills ...
ropaniser wn we

750 Ib. cracking plant

Assessment
Hits.

Hits in area—probably about 30 per cent.
destroyed.

Probably one hit and two transformers destroyed.

Direct hits claimed, but not shown by photo-
graphs; photography ceased about half time.

All hit.

Probably hit.
Probably hit.

H.M.S. VICTORIOUS.
25th January, 1945.

REPORT OF AIR CO-ORDINATOR
ON First STRIKE

I have the honour to submit the following
report on the conduct of the air strike against
Palembang, Sumatra, on the morning of
Wednesday, 24th January, 1945:—

2. Form Up

VICTORIOUS group was flown off and
formed up in 25 minutes. At this time (0645),
all the groups appeared ready and the Strike
Leader NDOMITABLE) should have com-
menced his circuit of the force, since time for
departure was 0655. He was so long in coming
that I flew over to INDOMITABLE’s sector to
see if there was any trouble. But their squad-
rons were all formed up and the additional
circuit made was unnecessary and delayed
departure at least five minutes. On future
occasions I will break R/T* silence if necessary,
to prevent similar delays.

Circuit of the force was commenced at 0650
and departure taken at 0704. The strike was
thus nine minutes late, but it was just as well,
since if they had been on time, the Fireflies
(INDEFATIGABLE) would not have joined
up before the strike reached the target.

Admiralty footnote :—
* R/T—radio-telephone.

3. Base to Coast
All went according to plan here except that
the escort, instead of remaining at the same
height as the bombers, as had been previously
arranged took up their correct escort intervals.
An accurate landfall was made at 0718 at
4,500 feet. .

4. Coast to Target

The climb was continued to 7,000 feet in
order to clear the mountains. This height was
not lost again, as had been arranged, and I am
not clear why the Strike Leader had to alter
this part of the plan. The weather was ex-
cellent for the strike. Thin 10/10th at about
20,000 feet which enabled pilots to look into
the sun with ease ; and very low 10/10th stratus
covering large areas. Visibility was about 60
miles and the wind from the south-east.

The formation of both the strike and escort
was exceptionally good. For reasons unknown,
one Avenger from INDEFATIGABLE’s squad-
ron started to straggle. I have a photograph
of this and have sent it to the squadron in the
hope that it will teach them what not to do.

At 0738 we passed over Matapoera at 7,500
feet and observed three landing strips. Details
of these have been reported separately. At
0803 the strike reached 12,000 feet. This was
only 12 minutes before the attack and I do
not consider soon enough. From the escort
point of view, we want the strike at its top
