1810

this extra, unnecessary, circuit was:—

(a) The strike departed at 0734 (four
minutes late).

{b) Three Avenger Squadrons were hope-
lessly out of position.

(c) The fighter escort was all jumbled up,
which, with the poor weather conditions
obtaining, made aviation in the area
extremely hazardous,

I think the time allowed, ie. 40 minutes
before collection and 50 minutes before de-
parture, could be reduced. The Strike Leader
should collect 30 minutes after take off and
depart 10 minutes later. At 0733, I observed
an air crew being picked up by a destroyer:
it seemed a little early in the day to start losing
aircraft.

3. Base to Coast

At 0740, the strike commenced climbing and
the escort took up position. An accurate
landfall was made at 0752 at 5,500 feet.
Formations had by now all closed up and the
escort was very tidily in position. I lost sight
of the fleet at about 10 miles owing to masses
of low cumulus. But over the land, conditions
were much improved. There was thin 10/10th
at about 14,000 feet and over the eastern plain
of Sumatra 10/10th cloud, 500 feet thick,
covering large areas. In fact, the weather
could not have been more ideal.

4. Coast to Target

On passing over Lake Ranau, one Avenger
commenced straggling and soon after turned
for base. I reported this to INDOMITABLE
but got no reply. The climb was continued
over the mountains to 7,500 feet. The forma-
tion of the strike and escort was very good.
The weather, however, got worse and I had
some doubts whether we would be able to see
the target. As the top cover was being forced
down by cloud, requests were passed to the
Strike Leader to fly lower. But he continued
to climb to 10,000 feet and caused embarrass-
ment to the escort above him. '

The journey to the target was otherwise un-
eventful. At 0830 I shifted to R/T Channel
C and heard Forces X-Ray and Yoke at work.
They were on their targets about 15 minutes
before we struck and by the sound of things
they were far too late. Most of their reports
were of Bandits* airborne. ‘

‘At 0835, the vexed question of balloons
cropped up and the escort leader, much to the
relief of the bombers, decided to use the Fire-
flies for this work. At 0840, the target could
be seen, fortunately quite clear of clouds. The
balloons were about 4,000 feet. All fires from
the previous raid on Pladjoe were out. Shortly
after, the Fireflies reported “ Out Lights ”, the
bombers deployed according to plan and I
moved ahead to observe the target.

Almost immediately, the heavy A.A. opened
up on the Fireflies. Several groups of about
10 rounds were observed extremely accurate
for height and range but, fortunately, out for
bearing. My flight also attracted the atten-
tions of the gunners but they were completely
unable to cope with gentle evasion. All this

Admiralty foo:note :—~
* Bandits—enemy aircraft,

SUPPLEMENT To THe LONDON GAZETTE, 5 APRIL, 1951

drew quite a bit of the A.A. away from the
bombers. But just after the deployment,
several enemy fighters were seen diving down
on them. I observed no reaction by the top or
middle cover. The plan for guarding individual
squadrons by sections of the escort appeared
in most cases to be a failure. Both squadrons
of No. 1 Wing received the unwelcome atten-
tions of Jap fighters which did not cease until
they commenced to bomb. During this period
no protection was afforded by our own fighters.
I believe No. 2 Wing were more fortunate.
About three balloons were destroyed but I don’t
think they were worth the attention the Fire-
flies gave them.

5. Attack

I commenced photographing at 0850 as the
first bombs fell. From visual observation,
some targets were severely hit and the photo-
graphs have confirmed this. Bombing by No. 1
Wing was truly impressive. By the time No. 2
Wing commenced bombing, it was getting a
bit difficult to see. The first squadron of that
wing (ILLUSTRIOUS) set off some oil tanks
in the vicinity and certainly were very close to
their target. Some of the last aircraft to bomb
obviously could not observe their correct target
and so, quite rightly, chose another. One stick
was seen to burst along the wharves. It seemed
a pity that so many aircraft were put on to
one small target whilst Pladjoe was completely
clear and could have been bombed accurately.

6. Withdrawal to Rendezvous

About three minutes after the last aircraft
bombed I finished photographing. I then
climbed from 6,000 feet to 10,000 in order to
take vertical line overlap photographs as the
flak had died down. I soon had to change
my mind as a Tojo was coming for us. In
shooting this one down, we descended to 0
feet and, attracted by the gunfire, an Oscar*
came along, and by 0905 he, too, was dead.

During this time the radio was giving me
an interesting picture of a long stream of
Avengers dribbling out of the target area to
the rendezvous, 30 miles away. It was evident
some of them could not find it. Nor could I
from 7,000 feet even though I searched for
some time. During this period there was quite
a vicious air battle of which I can give no detail.

7. Rendezvous to Base

The return was without opposition of any
kind. There seemed to be a little confusion
as to who was going to escort the stragglers.
Formation on the return was good and the
escort in position. I climbed to 10,000 feet
and swept the area astern of the formation but
no enemy aircraft attempted to shadow. After
the strike had crossed the coast I examined
Lake Ranau for any survivors but saw none.
I then proceeded to the submarine rendezvous
for the aircrews forced down and took oblique
photographs of all the river mouths in the bay
in question.

R/T discipline up till now had been 100 per
cent.'improved. But crossing the coast seemed
to be the signal for complete radio chaos.
Primarily the Avengers giving their damaged

Admiralty footnote:—
* Oscar—Japanese army fighter,
