1804

Office of Flag Officer Commanding
Aircraft Carriers,
British Pacific Fleet.
10th February, 1945.

OPERATION “MERIDIAN ”

The Report of the Proceedings of Force 63
in Operation “ Meridian” is forwarded here-
with.

2. I am not able to report that the object
set, “To put refineries at Palembang out of
action”, was achieved. Of the two refineries,
Songei Gerong, the smaller, is assessed as out
of action on photographic analysis, but
Pladjoe, which covers an extensive area and
in which the essential plants are widely
separated and generally duplicated, needs
probably another raid if all work is to stop.

3. The stage was set for such a final raid—
fighter opposition largely overcome, enemy
special army attack corps shot down, weather
possible, position of the Fleet not known—
but there was not enough oil.

4. The speeds—13 to 17 knots cruising, 22
knots off the Sumatran coast—were lower than
I have been accustomed to use in similar situa-
tions, or would choose to use: even then the
oil available proved short by 24 hours’ con-
sumption of what was needed.

5. The inter-tropical front, which lay
obstinately against the Sumatran coast until
the 23rd January, whilst it provided a con-
venient screen in which to operate, detracted
on the whole from success because spray and’
the torrential rains affected the serviceability
of the large number of aircraft necessarily
parked on deck,

6. Whilst the weather was bad at 0400, it
cleared for flying off at 0600 on the 24th. On
the 29th proceedings were hampered by low
cloud and rain storms, and the fact that so
considerable an air group formed up success-
fully in such conditions offers a fair measure
of the good drill of the squadrons.

7. The squadrons put the maximum of
human endeavour into the execution of the
plan; that they achieved so great a measure
of success against a not easily accessible and
heavily defended target justifies an outlook of
high promise for the future, besides being ever
most creditable to the officers and men
concerned.

I wish in this connection to mention to you
in this despatch the name of Major R. C. Hay,
D.S.C., Royal Marines, who, as Ait Co-
ordinator, controlled the approach and with-
drawal of the Striking Forces in a very able
manner, obtained a series of valuable photo-
graphs, and found time also to shoot down
three enemy aircraft with his own guns.

8. The overall cost of the operation in air-
craft lost from whatever cause was 41; air-
crews 17. Of the 12 aircraft known to have
waterlanded the crews of 10 were recovered ;
the position of the eleventh was never fixed :
the last landed within 25 miles of the rescue
submarine in the Malacca Straits and was not
apparently saved.

9. The relatively high proportion of aircraft
waterlanded is a natural reflection of the resolve
of aircrews to avoid becoming captive to the
Japanese: the resultant rescue problems are
sometimes difficult to solve.

SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 5 APRIL, 1951

10. It seems from their behaviour and sub-
sequent Japanese broadcasts that the Sally*
bombers which attacked the Fleet on the 29th
January were manned by suicide crews. The
aircraft used proved unsuitable for this form
of attack. The crews were determined,
achieved co-ordination and, flying low, pene-
trated the inner, carrier, ring; but a plan of
attack appeared to be lacking and the aircraft
offered easier targets than ever I have seen.

The attack was broken in the main by Sea-
fires whose orders were to break off at Bofors
range. With total disregard for safety they
very courageously followed their targets into
point blank pom-pom range of the ships, and
in most cases shot down or crippled them. One
at least was shot down by a Hellcat which was
flown off in the middle of the engagement, and
certainly one by ships’ gunfire. Generally the
fire, and fire discipline, of the Fleet was of a
low standard.

11. Whilst not seriously tested, the steaming
quality of the Fleet proved adequate for require-
ments ; but the figures for oil consumption were
higher generally than those published.

12. Next to admiration for the work of the.
Air Squadrons, my most particular impression
from this operation is that Seafire aircraft are
unsuitable for sustained ocean warfare.

(Signed) PHILIP VIAN,
Rear-Admiral.

REPORT ON OPERATION “ MERIDIAN”
NARRATIVE

Passage to First Oiling Rendezvous

1. (i) Force 69, consisting of H.MS.
URCHIN (Senior Officer) and R-F.As.f
ECHODALE, WAVE KING and EMPIRE
SALVAGE, left Trincomalee at 1530 on
Saturday, 13th January, 1945, and proceeded
to the first oiling rendezvous. .

(ii) Force 63, consisting of H. M. Ships
INDOMITABLE (Flag of Flag Officer Com-
manding Aircraft Carriers, British Pacific Fleet),
VICTORIOUS, ILLUSTRIOUS, INDEFATI-
GABLE, KING GEORGE V, ARGONAUT,
BLACK PRINCE, EURYALUS, CEYLON,
GRENVILLE (Captain (D), 25th Destroyer
Flotilla), UNDINE, URSA, UNDAUNTED,
KEMPENFELT (Captain (D), 27th Destroyer
Flotilla), WAKEFUL, WHIRLWIND,
WAGER, WESSEX and WHELP, sailed from
Trincomalee at 1430 on Tuesday, 16th January,
less CEYLON and WESSEX, who stayed to
embark mail and radar spares respectively.
CEYLON sailed to overtake at 1700.

Gii) R.F.A. ARNDALE sailed from Fre-
mantle on 15th January to join Force 69.

2. During the first ‘three days, night
encounter, aircraft shadowing, interception,
destroyer torpedo attack and various gunnery
exercises were carried out. :

3. (i) WESSEX joined Force 63 at 1930 on
19th January. Force 69 was not in sight
on arrival at the rendezvous on 20th
January, but was located at 0822 by air-
craft. KING GEORGE V, cruisers and
destroyers oiled between 0900 and 1850.

Admiralty foo‘notes :—

* Sally—Allied code name for a type of Japanese army
bomber. °

f R.F.A.—Royal Fleet Auxiliary.
