1732

be used in its less worn sections for passing
places.

By September, the road was nearly finished,

but maintenance of the completed section was
so abnormally heavy that it was decided to
waterproof the surface with bitumen. In view
of the probable future operations, this was
eventually not done.
_ Between July and November, therefore, no
major road work was done in Arakan other
than the widening of the coast road, and the
bulk of the engineers were employed in main-
tenance. 22,000 local labourers, excluding
military supervisors, were employed.

177. Imphal Front. Before the Japanese
offensive in March caused a stoppage of
work, the following all weather two-way roads
were being built :—

Imphal - Tiddim.
Palel - Tamu.
Tamu — Witok — ‘Mau.

178. Imphal—Tiddim (164 miles). It was
originally intended to improve this road to
an all-weather standard and as we advanced
much work was done on it.

By September, half the distance had been
finished, but the difficulties in maintaining an
all-weather standard were out of proportion to
the value of the road. I, therefore, decided
to concentrate all road building resources in
labour and material on the Tamu - Witok -
Kalewa route to the Chindwin; though some
had to be left to maintain the Tiddim road at
a standard adequate to support the force on
that line.

179. Palel- Tamu (43 miles). As soon as
operations permitted, the construction of this
road to a two-way, all-weather Class 30
standard was restarted and it was hoped to
finish it by the end of the year. This was
. later altered to Class 70 to permit of the
passage of loaded tank-transporters, and the.
date of completion was extended to April
1945. By November 1944, satisfactory pro-
gress had been made, 2,500 military and 2,000
local labour being employed.

180. Tamu-Witok—Kalewa (112 miles).
Planned before March as a two-way, all-
weather road from Tamu to Witok, this road
was subsequently extended to be two-way, fair-
weather Class 70 to Kalewa.

The road was virtually finished by Novem-
ber. An all-weather Class 70 road from Tamu
to Kalewa on a different alignment was also
Planned, but by November reconnaissance only

ad been made.

181. The “ Breach Road” (Bongaigaon -
Pandu). The Bongaigaon— Amingaon railway
has been cut during the monsoon every year
except one during the past thirty-two years,
and communications in Assam have been
interrupted for many months on each occasion.

To provide an alternative route for traffic
it was decided to improve to two-way, all-
weather standard the road from Bongaigaon to
Jogighopa (21 miles) on the north bank of
the Brahmaputra River and from Goalpara on
the south bank to Pandu (93 miles).

These roads, which were virtually finished
by November, should provide a good alterna-
tive route if the railway should be breached in
future. .

SUPPLEMENT to tHE LONDON: GAZETTE, 2 APRIL, 1951

182. Road Construction. Yn planning all-
weather roads in forward areas the problem
has been their construction during the monsoon
at a sufficient rate to ensure the adequate sup-
port of operations and their subsequent
maintenance.

“ Bithess ”, a bitumen-impregnated sheet of
heavy jute sacking which was used to cover
airfields and prevent penetration of water into
the ground, is. now being used on roads. It
provides an all-weather surface suitable for all
but tracked vehicles and can be laid at a rate
double that of metalling and tarring road sur-
faces.

The Engineering Effort. B. Airfields.

183. Few new airfields have been built, but
the demands for the expansion of existing
airfields,. and their conversion for use by
heavier types of aircraft, strained my engineer
resources to the utmost, in spite of the arrival
of new mechanical equipment.

The principal changes have been:—

Cox's Bazaar. Enlarged to accommodate
an additional heavy bomber squadron and
a fighter squadron.

Chittagong. Enlarged to take two heavy
bomber squadrons, a U.S.A.A.F. Lightning
squadron, a R.A.F, Wing and an Air Staging
Post.

Hathazari. Some twenty miles north of
Chittagong. Constructed for one transport
squadron.

Fenny. Doubled in size to accept four
U.S.A.A.F, Medium Bomber squadrons and
one long-range Fighter squadron.

Shamshernagar. Fifty miles south of

. Syhlhet, previously known as Tilagaon.

Completely re-designed from a bomber base

to an Air Transport and Air Service Centre.

The U.S.A.A.F. lent me an airborne avia-

tion engineer company and a group of

engineers to help in building this airfield.

Their assistance was valuable and the co-

operation between the American, British

and Indian engineer units engaged, exem-
plary. I have mentioned this project in
some detail because, not only is it the largest
- airfield in India, but it was the model of
the new airfields which we subsequently

Sylhet, was expanded for the U.S.A.A.F.
from a two squadron Heavy Bomber to a
four squadron Transport field.

Tulihal, near Imphal, has been enlarged
from a fair-weather Fighter to an all-weather
four squadron Transport field. Constructed
entirely with “‘ Bithess””, it is now regarded
as the best airfield in the Fourteenth Army
area.

I have referred only to major construction in
the rear areas. There was, of course, much
other less important work, and work on main-
tenance during the monsoon was heavy.

184. The construction of forward airfields
continued in co-operation with Headquarters,
Third Tactical Air Force. An important fact
which saved much work was our ascendancy in
the air. Dispersal areas were no longer needed
and this reduced the mileage of taxi tracks
and roads, labour. and material.

185. Airfields in North-East Assam. Much
work was still done on the numerous
airfields built for the USAAF. in
