SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 2 APRIL, 1951

2,000-foot height seven miles north-west of
Taungni (20 miles south-west of Mogaung).
One brigade of 36 British Division had been
flown into North Burma and was concentrating
in the Mogaung area.

Planning for Operations—Winter 1944-45.

46. In accordance with instructions received
from the Supreme Allied Commander, I issued
an Operation Instruction on the 29th July to
the Commander, Fourteenth Army, directing
that plans be made for the following post-
monsoon operations : —

(@) Arakan: An _ offensive/defence to
secute with minimum forces our present for-
ward positions in the Maungdaw — Tunnels
Area and to prevent enemy penetration in
the Kaladan Valley, which might endanger
the operations of our Air Forces and our
line of communication west of the Mayu
Range.

(6) Imphal Front: A phased plan (which
contemplated certain airborne operations)
with the following objectives:—

@ Seizure of Kalemyo - Kalewa.
Gi) An airborne assault against the

Ye-U area, to gain a quick exit into the

Mandalay Plain, to be followed by ground

operations to open the Kalewa- Ye-U

road so that heavy equipment, including
tanks, could be brought forward for an
advance on Mandalay.
Gii) Capture of Mandalay - Pakokku.
(iv) Consolidation along the general
line Pakokku - Mandalay - Maymyo -

Kyaukme-Lashio (in conjunction with

Northern Combat Area Command).

(©) I informed the Commander, Four-
teenth Army, that the Northern Combat
Area Command forces would advance to
capture the Katha~Bhamo area and later
Lashio, and that the Chinese Yunnan Force
would advance along the old Burma Road
to capture Hsenwi and Lashio.

(d) South Burma. A plan which did not
affect the operations covered by this
Despatch.

Operation Instructions affecting Operations in

August.

47. On the 6th August, the Commander,
Fourteenth Army, gave 33 Corps the follow-
ing tasks :—

(a) To pursue the enemy on the lines:
Imphal — Tiddim —- Kalemyo - Kalewa.
Tamu - Indainggyi - Kalewa.

Tamu — Sittaung.

(b) To occupy Sittaung in order to deny

the use of the Chindwin River to the enemy.

(©) If opportunity offered, to capture

Kalewa and establish a bridgehead in that

area.

He was told that air supply could be pro-
vided for a maximum of five brigades.

Operations in August.

48. Tiddim Road Sector. 5 Indian Divi-
sion maintained the impetus of its advance
down the Tiddim road during the month,
in spite of stubborn resistance by Japanese

s; the 75th milestone, which marks
the _Indo-Burmese frontier, was passed ;
and successive enemy positions—many of

1717

them of great natural strength—were over-
come by a combination of frontal assaults,
and wide turning movements through the
jungle-clad mountains. By the 4th August, the
number of captured tanks had risen to 32, and
by the end of the month a further 10 tanks,
200 M.T. and 12 guns had fallen into our hands,
On the 31st August, our troops were engaged
with the enemy about Milestone 96.

These operations were distinguished by the
highly successful co-operation of air, tanks,
artillery and infantry, which inflicted severe
casualties on the enemy and maintained the
speed of the advance.

49. Lushai Brigade. This independent
Brigade of three battalions had been given
the task of raiding the Japanese flanks and
rear during their withdrawal down the
Tiddim road. It had been ordered by
33 Corps at the end of July to intensify
its operations southwards from Milestone 60
almost to Tiddim. The operation was most
arduous as the Brigade had to advance
eastwards by bad tracks across steep hills and
deep valleys in the height of the monsoon.
During August, assisted by detachments of
Chin Levies, it was actively engaged with the
enemy and caused him much damage.

Some idea of the damage inflicted can be
gauged from the fact that, in one week alone,
one battalion killed 92 of the enemy, wounded
many more, and destroyed a large number of
lorries. The operations undoubtedly assisted
the advance of 5 Indian Division.

To facilitate co-operation, the Lushai
Brigade was placed under 5 Indian Division
for operations from the 15th July. It
continued to be dependent on air supply.

50. Tamu —Sittaung Track and Kabaw
Valley. Operations to clear the enemy from
the Palel - Tamu road were very successful, and
our forces occupied Tamu on the 4th August.
This village fell to 5 Brigade, of 2 British
Division, which had been placed under com-
mand of 23 Indian Division and held in reserve
in the Palel area. The village was found in
an indescribable state as wounded, sick, dying
and unburied dead Japanese officers and men
abandoned by the enemy were lying in con-
fusion in the houses and the streets. The
large quantity of abandoned equipment in-
cluded six guns and seventeen 3-ton lorries
in good condition. The capture of Tamu was
important as it is at the entrance of the Kabaw
Valley and lies at the junction of the tracks
leading east to Sittaung on the Chindwin, and
south to Kalemyo.

51. On the 7th August, 11 (East African)
Division, which had been concentrating in the
Palel area since the end of July, took over
from 23 Indian Division, which was gradually
pulled out to rest in Shillong. 25 (East
African) Brigade advanced along the track to
Sittaung meeting little resistance to start with ;
26 (East African) Brigade started down the
Kabaw Valiey.

The advance continued and, by the end of
the month, 25 (East African) Brigade had
reached Milestone 28 on the Sittaung track
having destroyed the enemy. 26 (East African)
Brigade also made good progress, and suc-
cessfully overcame many difficultjes, particu-
larly at the crossing of the Yu River which
was in full flood. By the end of August they
