SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 2 APRIL, 1951

I include, for information, the composition
of Northern Combat Area

36 British Division.

5332 Brigade (two U.S. regiments, one
Chinese regiment).

Chinese Army in India.

Chinese Expeditionary Force
released by the Generalissimo).

Fort Hertz Kachin Levies (re-enlisted for
service under Northern Combat Area Com-
mand).

Chinese-American airborne units.

84. L issued the following administrative
orders : —

(a) The (Tamu - Indainggyi - Kalewa —
Ye-U road to be improved to a capacity of
300 ‘tons daily and to an all-weather stan-

ard.

(b) The construction of the Manipur Road
— Imphal pipeline to be continued as rapidly
as resources permitted.

(c) Inland Water Transport on the
Chindwin to be used to the maximum extent
possible.

(@) Before the outbreak of the monsoon
in 1945, reserve stocks to be built up forward
of Kalewa for 45 days, plus 15 days’ working
stocks.

Operations in October.

85. Arakan—15 Indian Corps. On the front
of 25 Indian Division, there was no renewal of
the fighting which occurred at the end of
September, and activity in the coastal sector
-and east of the Mayu Range was reduced to
vigorous patrolling and artillery fire.

On 26 Indian Division’s front, however, the
Japanese attempted a reconnaissance in force of
our left flank. A raiding force drawn from all
three regiments of 55 Japanese Division pene-
trated into the Goppe Bazaar area and be-
tween the 6th and the 8th October we repelled
attacks at Panzai and in the vicinity of Goppe.
Our counter-attack was quick and strong and
by the end of the week the enemy had been
dispersed into the hills, losing two-thirds of his
strength killed and much equipment.

Our patrols were active in the area during
the rest of the month.

86. 3 Commando Brigade arrived at the end
of October and assumed responsibility for the
Teknaf Peninsula south of 26 Indian Division’s
boundary.

87. 81 (West African) Division. Early in the
month, the Japanese based on Daletme and
Paletwa showed considerable activity, but
81 (West African) Division continued its ad-
vance eastward to the Kaladan. They occupied
Mowdok and drove the enemy out of Labawa,
‘six miles to the north-east. After this, resist-
ance became sporadic and by. the 25th October
units of both brigades had reached and crossed
the Kaladan and were in contact with the enemy
on the east bank. At the end of the month one
brigade had begun to advance down the Kala-
dan River, while the other was moving south
down the Pi Chaung.

88. Situation in Arakan at the End of the
Monsoon. Although the monsoon prevented
major operations by either side, we had before
it ended seized the initiative and occupied
several important positions beyond our front
line in the May# Peninsula. At the same time,
81 (West African) Division had moved across
to the Kaladan Valley and captured Mowdok,

(when

1721

thereby controlling the routes from the Kaladan
into the Sangu Valley, and removing a threat
to our airfields and base.

89. Chindwin Front—33 Corps : (a) 5 Indian
Division (Tiddim-Kalemyo Road). Enemy
resistance in scattered pockets both east
and west of the road continued, and by
the 4th October the battle for Tiddim was
developing. Tiddim lies some 5,600 feet
above sea-level, 162 miles from Imphal. At
about Milestone 149, the road leaves the Mani-

- pur River and climbs 3,700 feet in the next

ten miles, the first six of which consist of a
series of steep hairpin bends. The Japanese
were holding strongly dug-in positions about
Milestone 158, with a forward position at Mile-
stone 152. They were also entrenched at
Valvum (6,000 feet) and Sialam Vum (8,000
feet), which are strong natural features about
three miles and seven miles east of Tiddim
Tespectively.

90. By the 10th October enemy resistance at
Milestone 152 had been broken and operations,
which, in spite of bad weather, were receiving
strong air support, were in progress against
stubborn and fierce opposition in the Mile-
stone 158, Valvum and Sialam Vum areas. A
wide turning movement, by an infantry brigade,
found the enemy also strongly entrenched at
Tuibal, thirteen miles east of Tiddim.

91. We pressed our attack with great vigour
throughout the following week. The final
assault on the positions at Milestone 158 cover-
ing Tiddim was supported by a co-ordinated
attack by tanks and Hurribombers. A thick
mist hid the advancing tanks, while the noise
of their engines was drowned by the roar of
low-flying aircraft. Complete surprise was
achieved and the position was captured.
Tiddim was occupied on the 18th October, by
which date the Valvum, Sialam Vum and
Tuibal positions had also been captured.

92. After the occupation of Tiddim, one
brigade continued the advance along the
Tiddim -Kalemyo road, strong resistance at
Milestone 7 being turned by a detachment from
Valvum. The Japanese, however, again made
a determined stand at Milestone 11 and to the’
north of it.

93. Meanwhile another brigade, west of
Tuibal, was attacking positions on the
Dolluang - Kennedy Peak track, in conjunction
with detachments of the Lushai Brigade which
had come up behind the enemy from the south-
west. Successful air strikes were a feature of
these operations.

94, By the end of the month, good progress
had been made against the main enemy posi-
tions in the Vital Corner- Fort White area,
“Vital Comer” being the name given to the
bend, about Milestone 13, where the road, after

due east and west, turns sharp south.
One brigade had successively captured enemy
positions from Sialam Vum, through Milestone
11, to Khum Vum, a 7,000 foot mountain about
four miles south of the road, and had estab-
lished a block at Milestone 14. A second
brigade was making a shallow right hook to the
south of the road, while the remaining brigade
of the Division was engaged in a deeper turn-
ing movement farther south to cut off the
enemy:in the Fort White area. Vital Comer
was thus virtually surrounded and the reduc-
tion of its defences with maximum air and
artillery support was in progress.
