1714

Myitkyina was still holding out against
Chinese and American troops and Morris-
force (part of Special Force), which were
heavily engaged.

The brigades of Special Force were much
Scattered and were operating in widely
separated areas. 14 L.R.P. Brigade was in the
area 28 miles west-south-west of Mogaung, 111
and 3 (West African) Brigades in contact with
38 Chinese Division were 20 miles west-north-
west of the same place. This Force, which
comprised the Long-Range Penetration
Brigades flown into North Burma in the Spring,
had come ‘under General Stilwell’s command
on the 20th June. when General Stilwell was
transferred from the command of General Slim
to that of the Supreme Allied Commander.

On the Salween front, the Chinese Expedi-
tionary Force was engaged 12 miles south-
south-west of Lungling.

12. Arakan. During the month, 25 and 26
Indian Divisions and 81 (West African)
Division had completed their moves to their
monsoon positions with little interference from
the enemy. Since then, operations in this area
had been confined to active patrolling.

13. Imphal Front. The opening of the
Kohima - Imphal road on the 22nd June com-
pleted the first task set by the Supreme Allied
Commander in his instructions of the 8th June.

14. Though the opening of the road solved
many of our administrative difficulties, it also
created a new set of problems. 2 British Divi-
sion, though its morale was high, had suffered
severe casualties and was tired. It was clear
that the Division could not continue to fight
without reinforcements and the necessary time
and facilities to train them. All expedients to
bring units up to strength were temporarily
exhausted. The Corps Commander considered
that the Division should be withdrawn from
active operations until the Autumn. A rest
area was therefore prepared but, as will be seen,
4 Brigade had to be used temporarily to relieve
20 Indian Division and, later, 5 Brigade was
called upon to support 23 Indian Division.

5 and 7 Indian Divisions had to resume their
proper compositions, which had been upset
‘when reinforcements had to be flown in during
the early stages of the battle. 161 Brigade,
which belonged to 5 Indian Division, had been
under command of 7 Indian Division, and 89
Brigade of 7 Indian Division had worked with
5 Indian Division. These two Brigades had to
return to their own Divisions.

15. The operations against Ukhrul consisted
of cross-country advances eastwards by 33 and
89 Brigades of 7 Indian Division, from the
Kohima - Imphal road, in co-operation with an
advance north-east by 20 Indian Division along
the main Imphal ~ Ukhrul road. This was com-
plicated initially because 20 Indian Division
and 89 Brigade were under command of 4
Corps, while 33 Brigade was under 33 Corps.
However, as soon as the advance got under
way, the Commander, 33 Corps assumed con-
trol of the whole operation.

16. By the end of June, 20 Indian Division
had reached a point eight miles west of Ukhrul
and 7 Indian‘ Division, further north, were
clearing the area four miles south-east of

‘Karong. | 1 .

SUPPLEMENT to THE LONDON GAZETTE, 2 APRIL, 1951

23 L.R.P. Brigade, advancing southwards,
had driven the enemy back to a line eight
miles south of Kharasom.

South of Imphal, 17 and 23 Indian Divisions
were still engaged in bitter fighting in the
Bishenpur and Palel areas respectively.

The monsoon had broken, and the troops
had to work under very arduous conditions
of rain and mud in the mountains and jungle.

17. On the 30th June, the institution of a
new boundary between 4 and 33 Corps, and
the consequent transfer of 20 Indian Division
dess 32 Brigade) from 4 Corps to 33 Corps,
marked the beginning of a new phase of opera-
tions. This boundary gave the area between
Imphal and Ukhrul inclusive to 33 Corps, and
left 4 Corps with Imphal and the areas of 5
Indian Division (Imphal-Bishenpur), 17
Indian Light Division (Bishenpur) and 23 Indian
Division (Palel).

The Situation in early July.

18. Chin Hills and Chindwin. As a result
of our continuous pressure in the Imphal Plain,
there were signs at the beginning of July that
the Japanese forces in Manipur were giving up
their plan for a final attack on Imphal.

19. On the 3rd July a brigade of 7 Indian
Division captured Ukhrul from the west, while
a column of 23 L.R.P. Brigade entered the
village almost simultaneously from the east.
The fall of Ukhrul was important since it was
the focal point of all communications in that
area ; its capture removed all threats to Imphal
from the north and north-east. 7

20. On the 29th June, I had wired to General
Slim that 31 Japanese Division would probably
be withdrawn to the south of Ukhrul, but that
the enemy might make a final desperate attempt
to capture Imphal from the general direction
of the Tiddim and Tamu roads. Although we
had sufficient strength to defeat any such
attempt, our task of clearing the enemy west
of the Chindwin would be facilitated if we
could develop a real threat to his communica-
tions. I therefore directed him to consider
whether the advance on Ukhrul could be con-
tinued south-south-east to Humine and Myothit
at the head of the Kabaw Valley. This would
give 31 Japanese Division no chance to recover
and would threaten the communications of 15
Japanese Division at Thaungdut and Tamu.

21. On the fall of Ukhrul, General Slim
issued an Operation Instruction, dated the Sth
July, directing 4 and 33 Corps to destroy the
Japanese forces west of the Chindwin River.
4 Corps, with 5 and 17 Indian Divisions and
one brigade of 20 Indian Division under com-
mand, were to clear the area west of the general
line Imphal-Shuganu. 33 Corps, with 2
British, 7, 20 and 23 Indian Divisions, 268
Indian Lorried Infantry Brigade, 23 L.R.P.
Brigade and 50 Indian Parachute Brigade under
command, were to clear the area east of this

22. By the 10th July, it had become clear
that the Japanese had begun a general with-
drawal from their three main concentration
areas about Bishenpur, Palel, and Ukhrul. They
had not captured Bishenpur or Palel.

23. North Burma. Although General Stilwell
was now no longer under General Slim’s com-
mand, I must review the operations as a whole,
as they had, of course, to be co-ordinated. I
