1722

95. 33 Corps: (6) 11 (East African) Division
(Kabaw Valley and Chindwin). During the
first fortnight of October, the brigade which
had been operating in the Sittaung area
on the east of the Chindwin was moving
into and down the Kabaw Valley. The
brigade already in the valley entered Yazagyo
on the 4th October and then cleared the
tracks, which lead from the Tamu -Kalemyo
road across to the Chindwin, of small enemy
detachments. To the north-east, the third
brigade of 11 (East African) Division had
unsuccessfully attacked strong enemy positions
north-west of Mawku, on the Chindwin River
six miles north of Mawlaik.

96. In the third week of October, two
brigades were moving forward against opposi-
tion, one brigade south of Yazagyo and one
to the north-east of it. The third brigade
had launched an attack against the enemy posi-
tions on the ridge north-west of Mawku and,
after confused fighting, had captured all but
one position, which was subsequently sur-
rounded and the enemy in it destroyed. The
stores and ammunition captured indicated that
the Japanese had intended a prolonged stand in

is area.

97. At the end of October, two brigades were
continuing their advance south to Inbaung,
after destroying enemy positions on the hills
to the east of the road. The third brigade
was fighting in and around Mawku Village.

98. Lushai Brigade. [arly in October,
the brigade regrouped in order to stop
the southern exits from the Tiddim and
Kennedy Peak areas, and at the same
time continued its operations against the
enemy’s Falam and Haka lines of communi-
cation. These operations ended in the occupa-
‘tion of Falam on the 18th October, Haka falling
four days later. These two places had been
captured by the Japanese just a year before.

Summary of Operations in October.

99. Arakan—15 Indian Corps. During the
early part of the month, there was con-
siderable fighting in the Taung Bazaar and
Goppe Bazaar areas with a strong hostile
detachment of all arms. It was severely de-
feated by 26 Indian Division. The Japanese
object had probably been either to cross the
Goppe Pass to Bawli and thus prevent our
tanks from entering the Mayu Valley, or else
to establish a firm base at Goppe from which
taiding parties could operate.

100. The enemy in Paletwa and Daletme had
also displayed increased activity in the Mowdok
area, probably in an attempt to mislead us as
to their strength in the Kaladan. They had
not, however, succeeded in delaying the ad-
vance of 81 (West African) Division which,.by
the end of the month, had occupied Daletme
and was pushing southwards down the Kaladan
Valley towards Paletwa.

101. Activity in the coastal sector was con-
fined during October to extensive patrolling by
both sides.

102. Chindwin Front—33 Corps. The ad-
vance of 5 Indian Division down the Tiddim
toad ended with their entry into Tiddim
on the 18th October, after strong’ enemy
positions had been captured north and
east of the village. The advance then con-
tinued in a south-easterly direction towards

SUPPLEMENT to THE LONDON GAZETTE, 2 APRIL, 1951

Fort White and Kalemyo. By the end of the
month, strong defences in the Kennedy Peak
area were attacked and a turning movement to
cut off Fort White was in progress.

103. Falam and Haka had been occupied
during the month by elements of the Lushai.
Brigade, the small Japanese garrisons with-
drawing southwards under pressure.

104. In the Kabaw Valley, troops of 11 (East.
African) Division entered Yazagyo on the 4th
October. The advance southwards was held
up during the middle of the month by heavy
tains, but subsequently continued. By the end
of October, the Division, less one brigade, was.
fighting in the area thirteen miles north of
Kalemyo. The brigade operating down the
Chindwin Valley, after capturing strong enemy
positions north-west of Mawku, was engaged in.
the vicinity of the village itself. The situation
at the end of October was that the Japanese
had withdrawn from the Chindwin River,
north of Paungbyin, and were occupying posi-
tions in the Atwin Yomas, north-west of
Mawlaik. It appeared possible that, when
driven from these, they might try to hold
the escarpment which divides the Chindwin
from the Mu River.

105. North Burma. Rapid progress was
made during the month in our southward
advance down the railway. On the 2ist
October, 36 British Division occupied
Mohnyin, the Japanese apparently being
taken by surprise as large quantities of
stores, ammunition and supplies fell into
our hands. After overcoming slight oppo-
sition at Mawhun, Mawlu was captured
on the 31st October. The enemy abandoned
large trenched areas in Mawhun without fight-
ing, but put up a stiffer resistance at Mawlu,
which incidentally had been the stronghold of
one of our Long-Range Penetration Brigades
during ‘the Spring.

38 Chinese Division, advancing down the
road towards Bhamo from the Kazu area, was
only twenty-four miles north-north-east of
Bhamo by the 31st October.

Operation Instructions issued prior to the 12th
November. : :

106. On the 6th November, the Commander,
Fourteenth Army, instructed 4 Corps to em-
ploy one brigade group with the object of:—

(a) Capturing Pinlebu by an overland

advanice.

(b) Patrolling in the direction of Indaw —
Katha and establishing contact with
Northern Combat Area Command.

(c) Patrolling to the rail/road in the area
wo G: - Indaw. | th

ining information as to the prac-

ticability of routes from the Chindwin River

to the line of the rail/road for the passage

of large forces, including medium tanks.

Leading units of this brigade group were
to cross the Chindwin not later than the 20th
November and the roads Tamu-Tonhe and
Tamu -—Sittaung were to be improved to the
standard of “ Fair-weather class 5, one-way ”
by the 15th December and the 15th January
respectively. : ;

107. Before relinquishing command, J
issued three Operation Instructions :

The first, dated the 6th November, directed
that 15 Indian Corps, formerly under
