SUPPLEMENT to THE LONDON GAZETTE, 2 APRIL, 1951

206. This Despatch brings to an end the
account of my command of 11 Army Group,
and I cannot finish it without paying tribute
to the magnificent team of officers and men
who made up the forces under my command.

Though it is outside the period covered by
my two Despatches I must refer briefly to the
six months in 1943 in which I commanded
Eastern Army out of which Fourteenth Army
was born. |

In those early days, deficiencies in equip-
ment ; shortage of trained reinforcements ; lack
of welfare arrangements; long service over-
seas ; inadequate leave due to lack of accom-
modation and transport; indifferent rations ;
much sickness; slow mails; an apparent lack
of interest at home in what was being done and
endured on the Burma Front; and an exag-
gerated opinion of the efficiency of the Japanese
had combined to lower the morale and destroy
the confidence of the Army.

Without confidence and high morale, equip-
ment and weapons, however good, are useless,
and the re-creation of these two qualities was
the first task to which we all had to address
ourselves during the monsoon of 1943. Con-
fidence could be created by training and im-
proved equipment, morale by confidence and
care for the spiritual and physical well being
of the troops.

All through that monsoon, the Commander-
in-Chief, India, did all that was possible to
improve the training and, with his limited re-
sources, the welfare of the troops.

Much was accomplished, and by October,
1943—when direction of the operations was
about to pass to the Supreme Allied Com-
mander; Fourteenth Army was about to be
formed, and the weather moderated suffi-

ciently to allow us to move—the work done”

during the monsoon began to bear fruit. Opera-
tions started, slowly at first, but with gathering
momentum as their first encounters with the
enemy showed the troops that the Japanese
soldier, though tough and prepared to die
rather than surrender, was not so skilful as
themselves nor so well equipped.

The Army must have contained almost more
diverse races than any other, even in this war,
when so many nations have fought as Allies.

There were’ battalions from British county
regiments distinguished in our history, and
officers and men from every county in
England, Scotland, Ireland and Wales serving
in other arms or with units of the Indian and
African forces.

The Indian units of which the bulk of Four-
teenth Army was composed, came from many
famous regiments, recruited from races whose
names have been household words since first
we went to India: Rajputs, Dogras, Sikhs,
Jats, Mahommedans from the Punjab, Gurkhas,

1735

Garhwalis and Madrassis to mention but a few
of those who volunteered to fight for the King
Emperor.

To the Army were added later divisions from
our West and East African Colonies, composed
of Hausas, Yorubas and Ibos from Nigeria ;
Kanjarga, Dagartis and Ashantis from the Gold
Coast ; Mendis and Timinis from Sierra Leone ;
Mandingos from Gambia; Nyasas and Yaos
from Nyasaland ; Manyamwezi and Manyema
from Tanganyika; Akamba, Nandi and
Kavirondo from Kenya ; Baganda and Achole
from Uganda; Somalis from Somaliland ;
Awemba and Angoni from Northern Rhodesia
and many others too numerous to mention.
All these men had volunteered to fight for
the King.

The success of Fourteenth Army is the
best testimonial to its officers and men and I
cannot add anything to it. Victory was
achieved by fine leading by all commanders
from the highest to the most junior section
leader ; by the skill of the men in the ranks ;
by high courage in battle; by steady endur-
ance under conditions of climate and health
worse than almost anywhere in the world; by
a determination to defeat the enemy, and by
that spirit, which alone enables an army to
exert its maximum strength, of co-operation
among all ranks and arms.

It has been an immense source of pride to
me to watch the growth of confidence and
skill which enabled the officers and men of
Fourteenth Army to inflict the first major
defeat upon the Japanese and by unrelenting
pursuit to drive them with crippling losses in
men and material in disorder across the
Chindwin.

207. Once again I should like to thank
General Sir Claude Auchinleck* and the staff
at his Headquarters for their generous and un-
failing help, without which 11 Army Group
could not have driven the Japanese back from
the frontiers of India. .

I also wish to give a final word of thanks to
my own staff for their hard work and fine
team spirit, upon which I was able always
confidently to rely however acute the crisis or
hard the work.

I want especially to mention my two prin-
cipal Staff Officers, Major-General I. S. O.
Playfair, M.G.G.S., and Major-General E. N.
Goddard, M.G.A.. whose wise advice, good
judgment and unfailing loyalty were a great
support to me.

Finally, I have no doubt that the defeat
of the Japanese forces in Burma is due to the
balanced judgment, determination and skill of
Lieut.-General Sir William Slim, upon whom
fell the burden of the fighting.

* Now Field-Marshal Sir Claude J. E. Auchinleck,
G.C.B., G.C.LE., C.S.I., D.S.O., O.B.E.

