SUPPLEMENT to tHE LONDON GAZETTE, 2 APRIL, 1951

- (c) The Sittaung track from Palel to the
Chindwin was not a road at all. It was
passable for jeeps and 4 x 4 vehicles as
far as the Yu River. There a ferry, beyond
which only pack or porter transport could
be used, was established. Owing to the
amount of blasting which would have been
necessary, it was not possible to clear a track
with bulldozers.

@) The road to Tiddim was worse, if pos-
sible, than the Kabaw Valley road. It was
commanded on either side by scrub-covered
hills up to 8,000 feet, and some of the more
mountainous sections resembled toboggan
runs down which vehicles slid on mud
instead of snow.

These conditions must be remembered when
judging the speed of our advances along the
Tiddim road and the Kabaw Valley. We had
to overcome not only a determined enemy,
but Napoleon’s fourth element.

Situation on the 22nd June and subsequent
operations.
9. (a) Arakan. 15 Indian Corps (Lieut.
General A, F. P. Christison*).
(@) 25 Indian Division: ‘Maungdaw -~
Tunnels Area.
(ii) 26 Indian Division :

One Brigade—Bawli Bazaar -Goppe
Bazaar - Taung Bazaar.

One Brigade—Taungbro - Tumbru.

One Brigade—Cox’s Bazaar.

(iii) 81 (West African) Division :

Divisional H.Q. and one brigade—
Chiringa.

One brigade taking up new positions
to protect the eastern approaches of the
Chiringa — Singpa track, with detachments
on the Sangu River to block enemy
attempts to pentrate into that area.

(b) Imphal Front (4 and 33 Corps). 4 Corps
(Lieut.-General G. A. P. Scoonest). .
@) 17 Indian Light Division, with one
-brigade of 20 Indian Division under com-
mand, was engaged in attacking 33 Japanese
Division in the Bishenpur area. Two

- battalions and one mountain battery had
cut the enemy’s line of communication
about Milestone 33 on the Imphal - Tiddim

- toad by making a wide turning movement.

from the east, and had then driven north
to positions four miles south of Bishenput.
This bold attack on the enemy’s rear had
“thrown them into considerable confusion
and inflicted heavy casualties.

(ii) While these operations were in pro-
gress south of Imphal, 5 Indian Division,
which had taken over the area north of
Imphal from 17 Indian Light Division, was
attacking the enemy on the road to Kohima.
After clearing Kanglatongbi it reached
Milestone 109, where it made contact with
2 British Division of 33 Corps driving down
from the north.

(ii) 20 Indian Division was engaging the
enemy in the Ukhrul sector, with one brigade
in the area 16 miles west of the village

* Now General Sir A. F. Philip Christison, Bart.,
G.B.E.. C.B., D.S.O., M.C.

+ Now General Sir Geoffry A. P. Scoones, K.C.B.,
K.B.E, C.S.1., D.S.0., M.C,

(64487)

1713

astride the Japanese communications, and

one brigade on the Imphal—-Ukhrul road

clearing enemy positions about Milestone 17.

The third brigade of this Division was with

the 17 Indian Light Division. 50 Indian Para-

chute Brigade (two battalions) was in action
south of the Imphal - Ukhrul road, east of

Wangijing..

(iv) 23 Indian Division was engaged with:
the enemy in an area some three miles east.
and south-east of Palel.

(c) 33 Corps (Lieut.-General M. G. N..
Stopford*).

@ 7 Indian Division, which had been om
the left flank of 2 British Division, was,
after the junction of 33 and 4 Corps, ordered.
to move east on Ukhrul.

(ii) 2 British Division and 268 Indian
Lorried Infantry Brigade were responsible
for the protection of the Kohima ~ Imphal
road south and north of Milestone 79
respectively,

. Gi) 23 LRP. Brigade (Long-Range
Penetration Group). was clearing the tracks.
leading down to Ukhrul from the north,
and cutting the enemy’s routes to the east.
10. Although the picture at the end of June

was one of Japanese retreat on all sectors

of the Imphal front, I must emphasize that
our success had only been achieved after hard:
fighting and severe losses on both sides.

Indeed, the Army Commander described it as.

the bitterest fighting he had seen in this or.

any other war. Even when it must have
been obvious to the Japanese High Command’
that our communications to Imphal were about
to be re-established, they issued orders to:
their 33 and 15 Divisions that Imphal was.
to be taken at all costs. We captured the
orders in which the Commander, 33 Japanese.

Division, informed his troops “ The fate of the

Empire depends on this battle. You will

capture Imphal but you will be annihilated ”.

33 Japanese Division made a series of heavy

attacks, but they were met with steady valour

by our 17 Indian Division who saw to it that
the “annihilation ” of the enemy commander’s

prophecy was fulfilled. .

What was left of the enemy’s 33 and 15
Divisions was driven into the inhospitable
country south of Bishenpur and south-east of
Palel. Elements of 15 Japanese Division,
however, had reinforced 31 Japanese Division
which then attacked in the area between
Ukhrul and Imphal. This attack failed.

The Situation at the End of June.

11. North Burma. 22 Chinese Division,
which had captured Kamaing on the 16th June,
was continuing its advance southwards in the
face of opposition by part of 18 Japanese
Division between Kamaing and Mogaung.

77 L.R.P. Brigade (Special Force), assisted
by a Chinese regiment, captured Mogaung on
the 26th June, the enemy losing severely in
men and material, which included some
medium artillery, This was a particularly fine
action by 77 L.R.P. Brigade against most stub-
born resistance by units of 53 Japanese Divi-
sion. The capture of Mogaung was important,
as it opened the way for further operations
southward.

* Now General Sir Montagu G. N. Stopford, G.C.5,;
KBE. DS.0., MC.
A2
