SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 2 APRIL, 1951

Fourteenth Army, would come under com-
mand of 11 Army Group from midnight i5th-
16th November. 15 Indian Corps’ Order of
Battle would be :—

25 Indian Division.

26 Indian Division.

81 (West African) Division. (Provision of

a third brigade under consideration.)

82 (West African) Division. (On arrival
’ in Arakan.)
50 Indian Tank Brigade.
3 Commando Brigade.
Corps Troops.

The reason for this change was to free the
‘Commander, Fourteenth Army, from respon-
sibility for Arakan, in view of the important
gperations he was about to undertake in

ura.

108. On the 9th November, I issued orders
for the formation of a command and staff for
the lines of communication, to centralise the
lines ‘of communication under a separate
‘Commander and thus relieve the Commander,
Fourteenth Army, and Commander, 15 Indian
Corps, of responsibilities for their rear areas.
The new Line of Communication Command
‘was to comprise the existing 202 and 404 Lines
of Communication Areas and the Fort Hertz
Area. The rear boundaries of. Fourteenth
Army and 15 Indian Corps were to be adjusted
as the progress of operations dictated, in order
to relieve the forward Commander of adminis-
trative responsibilities.

109. My third Operation Instruction dated
the 9th November, was addressed to the Com-
mander of 15 Indian Corps.

The general objects I gave to him were :—

(a) To clear Arakan to the line (inclusive)
Akyab-Minbya as early as possible, in
order to release troops for other purposes.

(b) To secure the area Chittagong - Cox’s
Bazaar.

The specific tasks were :— :
ue. 4 land advance cin Arakan down the
layu Peninsula, the Kalapanzin ley an
the Kaladan Valley, to destroy or expel the
Japanese within the area north of the general
Tine Foul Point -Kudaung Island —Minbya.
This advance was to start as soon as possible.
(6) An amphibious assault on Akyab
Island about the 15th January, supported by
the maximum sea and air bombardment.
(© Consolidation to secure firmly the area
north of the general line Akyab - Minbya.

110. My object in issuing the above Instruc-
tion was twofold :—

(@ To ‘tie down and destroy in Arakan
Japanese forces which might otherwise be
used against Fourteenth Army.

(b) By destroying the Japanese forces in
Arakan it would be possible to release forces
for other operations which the Supreme
Allied Commander was anxious to under-

Operations from the 1st to the 12th November.

111. Arakan—15 Indian Corps. 25 and 26
Indian Divisions continued their active patrol-
ling and other minor operations with steady
success. The leading brigade of 82 (West
African) Division arrived to relieve troops in
the Kalapanzin area.

1723

81 (West African) Division continued its
advance down the Kaladan in spite of consider-
able enemy resistance and reached the out-
skirts of Paletwa.

112. Chindwin Front—33 Corps: (a) 5
Indian Division (Tiddim - Kalemyo Road). It
will be recalled that, at the end of
October, 5 Indian Division having cut in be-
hind the Japanese and launched a converging
attack, was assaulting their positions at Vital
Corner, while one brigade was carrying out a
wide turning movement against Fort White.
The beginning of November saw the capture
of Vital Corner and the final breakdown of all
enemy resistance northwards from Milestone
14 to Sialam Vum inclusive, the enemy suffer-
ing heavy casualties. We resumed our advance
down the road and finally stormed Kennedy
Peak, the 9,000 foot mountain just south of
Milestone 15, on the 4th November after two
attacks had failed. A sharp action was then
fought for the positions dominating the road
between Milestones 22 and 23. Point 8225 was
successfully assaulted on the 7th November
and Fort White occupied without further
opposition. In spite of the mountainous
country, tanks were able to play an important
part in the fighting.

113. The brigade moving to outflank Fort
White had, in the meantime, cleared the enemy
from a 7,000 foot feature three miles down the
Fort White -Falam track (Point 7480). Then,
after an initial failure, they gained the main
road and established a road-block near Mile-
stone 25, where later they gained touch with
the brigade advancing along the road itself.
Stiff resistance was met at Vownalu Mual
(Milestone 29), and again at Milestone 31 where
we were held up for two days. However, on
the 11th November the advance was resumed,
Numbers 2 and 3 Stockades falling without
opposition. Forward elements pressed on to
Milestone 40, but the main body was delayed
by stiff resistance east of Number 2 Stockade.

The third brigade of the Division was en-
gaged during this period in blocking tracks,
and a heavy toll was taken of the Japanese try-
ing to escape by these routes.

114. 33. Corps: (6) 11 (East African)
Division (Kabaw Valley and Chindwin). Early
in the month, the leading brigade, with
tank support, cleared the enemy from all
his positions south of Yazagyo and then in-
flicted further heavy casualties as he was
successively driven out of positions further to
south. The enemy next stood three miles
north of Indainggyi (six miles north-east of
Kalemyo) where his positions were only cap-
tured after all the defenders had been killed.

The brigade in support was following up
closely, having sent detachments (a) to clear
the track leading from the Kabaw Valley to
Mawlaik and (b) to block the tracks from the
west and thus destroy enemy parties escaping
from 5 Indian Division in the Dolluang area.

Meanwhile the brigade pushing down’ the
Chindwin had overcome strong resistance in
the vicinity of Mawku and, on the 11th Novem-
ber, occupied Mawlaik. It then advanced
astride the river.

11 (Bast African) Division reached Kalemyo
on the 15th November, and thus ended this
phase of the operations.
