1734

police, and agricultural labour. Nevertheless,
a police force was organized, order restored,
crops sown, and “collaborators” brought to
trial

196. In the Kabaw Valley and the Naga and
Chin Hills, .the work of the Military Admin-
istration was largely confined to the organiza-
tion of Intelligence, the provision of labour,
and general liaison betwen the Army and the
local population.

In Arakan, the British Military Administra-
tion continued to administer the northern
area.

197. The Civil Affairs Service depots for re-
fief supplies and stores were at Chittagong
for Arakan, at Manipur Road and Imphal for
the Chin and Naga Hills and Upper Chindwin,
and at Ledo and Moran (seventy miles south-
west of Ledo) for the Northern Combat Area
Command area. The difficulty, of course, lay
in moving these supplies forward to distribution
centres ; and Army air and road transport had
to be borrowed, until such time as Civil Affairs
Service transport companies could be formed.

198. In spite of the shortage of transport, the
paucity of communications and bad weather,
the whole of the relief supplies for the popula-
tion of the re-occupied areas were successfully
distributed, including some 6,000 tons of rice,
1,500 tons of salt, and large quantities of milk,
cloth, etc.

The chiefs, headmen and local inhabitants of
the areas released from Japanese occupation
were found for the most part to have behaved
loyally during our absence and, with a few
excentions, our return was greeted with satis-
‘action.

Main Administrative Lessons.

199. Air Supply. The need of foresight, of
standardising drops, of giving the Air Supply
Depots ample warning of any change of plan.
and of economising resources, were all of
paramount importance. As operations went
on, formations became more skilful in choos-
ing dropping zones, and pilots more efficient
at dropping on them. The necessity for
alternative dropping zones was clearly brought

out. Finally, the importance’ of salvaging all
parachute material and containers was
emphasised.

200. To meet the uncertainties of supply-
dropping in the monsoon, orders were given
that, as soon as there was a failure to drop
supplies, all ranks and mules were to be put
on half rations until dropping could be re-
sumed. All troops carried three days’ reserves
and they could therefore carry on for six days:
in: addition they had their emergency rations.
These precautionary measures turned out to be
wise. It so happened that the maximum num-

ber of days on which supply-dropping was:

impossible consecutively was five, but on one
occasion the margin was narrow. In a final
attempt on the sixth day, the aircraft found
only one gap in the cloud over the whole area.
Under this gap was the dropping zone.

201. Vehicles. The value of the 30 cwt.
6 x 6 vehicles has been shown. It had the
éross-country performance of a jeep, except on
narrow tracks, and nearly the capacity of a
3-tonner.

As regards specialist vehicles, experience
has shown that they should either all be 4 x 4
or that their equipment should be capable of

‘SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 2 APRIL, 1951

being fitted on to a standard chassis. The
latter is preferable as, should the specialist
vehicle be damaged, its equipment can be
quickly transferred

The highest standards of maintenance and
traffic discipline are essential to maintain effi-
ciency under the conditions I have described.

202. Salvage. Owing to the length and com-
plexity of the lines of communication, it was
found unprofitable to send back many types of
salvage. Instead, workshops were set up
which manufactured from this salvage a large
assortment of articles, and thereby saved
transport.

203. Welfare. Good administration in units
in the provision of food, recreation, etc., was
vitally important in the monsoon for the quick
restoration of morale after battle. Cinemas are
possibly better than E.N.S.A. parties in this
Theatre and I hope that before long each
brigade will have its own. Corps “ Welfare
Shops ” proved very popular.

Under monsoon conditions, arrangements for
the periodical withdrawal of troops from the
line in order to have hot baths and a change
of clothing aré essential and have a high moral
value.

204. Conclusion. The administrative
machine stood up well to the strain of fighting a
war and administering a great expanse of terri-
tory with inadequate resources and under diffi-
cult conditions. Much improvisation has been
necessary and all Services have shown great
resource and ingenuity in doing their many
duties. Their success reflects the greatest credit
on all concerned.

Part IV. CONCLUSION.

205. “ This Army has by its aggressive opera-
tions guarded the base of the American air
line to China and protected India against the
horrors of Japanese invasion.” With these
words Mr. Churchill put in clear perspective
the vital part that Fourteenth Army has
played during the last six months in the
struggle against Japan. The crushing of the
Japanese offensive against Kohima and Imphal
and our pursuit of his retreating columns to
the Chindwin were, of course, one battle. We
have inflicted upon the enemy a major defeat.
It is the first time the Japanese have been
driven back so far—and they will go further.
The facts speak for themselves and they will
give encouragement and assurance to those who
fought against a ruthless and cunning enemy,
against disease and in rain and heat through
the jungles and mountains of Assam and
Burma, to inflict the first great land defeat on
Japan.

I have quoted the words of the Prime
Minister. I also quote a few sentences from
an address delivered by His Excellency the
Viceroy, Field-Marshal Lord Wavell, when
he visited the troops during the course of the
campaign: “You will find that, when the
history of the war comes to be written, the
recent fighting will be put down as one of the
turning points of the war, when the Japanese
were routed and their downfall really began.
Not only have you inflicted a tremendous defeat
on the enemy but, even more, you have dealt
a damaging blow to their morale—and it is
the breaking of the wom morale that
finishes wars in the en
