SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 19 MARCH, 1951

IV Corps was deployed. Further north still
he was confronted by two Chinese Divisions
based on Ledo, and beyond this we held posi-
tions as far as the River Salween with a small
force based at Fort Hertz. The enemy’s bases
and lines of communication stretched for 900
miles from Bangkok to Myitkyina, over the
whole length of which it was possible to attack

15. The security of sea communications
meant that General Reconnaissance aircraft had
to cover an area ranging from South Africa to
Sumatra, The patrol of this vast expanse of
sea contributed a problem that could only be
met by the careful husbanding and disposition
of the small forces available.

* * * * * *

16. The account of a campaign covering such
a wide area and diversity of activities does not
admit of chronological treatment. I have there-
fore dealt separately with each strand of the
pattern of operations, commencing with the
primary task, the maintenance of air superiority,
and placing air transport operations next in
view of the importance they were to assume.

* * * * * *

PART TWO
OPERATIONS
I—THE MAINTENANCE OF AIR SUPERIORITY

17. The advent of Spitfires in Bengal early
in November had already begun an era of
successful interceptions in which the enemy
discovered for the first time in this theatre
the efficacy of modern fighter aircraft backed
by a well developed system of warning and
control.

18. The first squadrons (Nos. 615 and .697
A.AF.) were based on Chittagong in order
to protect and cover that vital port and to
cover the Arakan front which was to be the
scene of the first major battles of the cam-
paign. Within the month the Spitfires destroyed
four enemy photographic reconnaissance air-
craft of the Dinah type whose excellent per-
formance had hitherto allowed them to range
with impunity over our forward bases at a
height and speed which Hurricanes could not
equal. The enemy reacted by sending out
fighter sweeps to test the new arrivals and
whittle down our Spitfire strength in order that
he could once again range over the Arakan
suffering only the minor casualties that Hurri-
canes could inflict. In both these objects he
was unsuccessful, and by the end of December
had lost twenty-two aircraft, probably Jost seven
and had suffered damage to twenty-six against
our loss of thirteen. The greatest success scored
in these raids was by No. 136 Squadron who,
on the last day of the year, scored 12 destroyed,
3 probably destroyed, and 8 damaged against a
mixed force of bombers and fighters which
were attempting to attack light Naval forces
off the Arakan coast. As a result of this vic-
tory the Secretary of State for Air signalled
his congratulations and commented that the
newly arrived Spitfires had come into good
hands,

19. The one occasion the enemy could claim
as a success at this time was a bold strike
aimed at Calcutta with the double object of
damaging port installations and demoralising
the city. Hie divined that over a front of 700

(11543)

1383

miles, defence in depth could not be so uni-
formly effective and that in the rear areas
which included Calcutta, he would probably
be met with Hurricanes. On 5th December he
sent a mixed force of approximately sixty
bombers and fighters in two waves which suc-
ceeded in bombing Calcutta for the loss of 2
destroyed, 1 probably destroyed, and 4 dam-
aged, while the three and a half Hurricane
squadrons (the half being night fighters) suffered
five destroyed and six damaged. That the enemy
put-his maximum effort into the attack is
evidenced by the fact that the second wave
included Naval aircraft.

20. During January the Spitfire squadrons:
gained valuable experience in air fighting and
tactics that was to stand them in good stead:
in the greater battles to come. The enemy
continued to send fighter sweeps over the
Arakan, but Spitfires were able to inflict
casualties upon them in the ratio of eight to
one. By this time two squadrons of Spitfire
VdIIs (Nos. 81 and 152) had arrived from
Middle East, and I now had at my disposal
in the forward areas of Bengal four squadrons
of Spitfires and nine of Hurricanes for fighter
operations; the stage was thus set for the
opening of the battle in Arakan on the 4th
February. Anticipating our own ground offen-
sive by four days the enemy launched an attack
with the object of annihilating the 5th and 7th
Indian Divisions and pressing on to capture
Chittagong. This ambitious plan was attended
by the most impressive measure of air support
afforded by him in this theatre, sweeps by for-
mations of fifty plus aircraft being reported
daily. The objects of the J.A.F. appear to have
been firstly to intercept our aircraft engaged
on close support, secondly to increase the
morale of his own troops and thirdly to give
some measure of ground support by attacks
on our positions and forward bases. As the
battle developed, one other task assumed over~
tiding priority for the enemy air forces. The

th Indian Division, cut off from its supply
bases, was being supplied wholly by air. It
was of vital importance to the enemy that our
supply-dropping aircraft should not succeed in
this task, but the air superiority which we had
established, the provision of standing patrols.
—particularly in the Kaladan Valley where,
owing to the intervening hills, no radar cover
below 10,000 feet was available—and resort to-
supply dropping by night enabled transport.
aircraft to maintain the beleaguered forces for
the loss of only one Dakota (C.47) to enemy
fighters.

21. The tactics which were employed to gair
this dominance over the Arakan battle front
centred around the three forward squadrons
equipped with Spitfire Vs and a few Spitfire
VIlIs. Hurricanes were used for airfield cover
when Spitfires were re-fuelling and re-arming,
and for standing patrols over possible target.
areas during hostile raids in case of a missed
interception. The enemy countered by intro-
ducing the Tojo. whose performance exceeded
that of the Oscar, adopting the defensive circle:
and splitting into small groups when the circle:
was broken. This brought them a relative
measure of success inasmuch as their losses:
decreased whilst those of the Spitfires gradually
increased.

22. The advantages of the Spitfire VIII ix
this battle were not immediately apparent, for

A2
