1386

finaily planned involved the large scale use
of transport aircraft to fly in and supply the
brigades, and the energetic employment of
close support aircraft to make up the mobile
columns’ deficiencies in artillery. The First
Air Commando Unit under Colonel Cochran,
US.A.A.F., had been specially created and
sent to this theatre to fill these needs, and
acted as a task force in support of General
Wingate. I have dealt with the activities of
this force separately.

35. The long range penetration brigade
which was making its way across the Chindwin
overland towards Katha received its first air-
borne suppiies on 10th February, and its main-
tenance thereafter became a continuous com-
mitment. The remaining two brigades were
landed on two strips improvised in the jungle
during the nights of Sth/6th and 10th/11th
March, and a fourth and fifth brigade were
flown into another landing ground during the
nights of 24th/25th March and 5th/6th April.
The successful accomplishment of the air side
of this operation was shared directly by the
First Air Commando Unit and by the British
and American Transport squadrons which
sparticipated, although the whole operation was
only made possible by the high degree of
air superiority gained by the tactical air forces
in the preceding months.

36. The initial fly-in was the work of gliders
which carried an American airfield engineer
company whose task it was to receive Dakotas
{C.47) on the following night, and also a suffi-
cient number of combat troops with equipment
to defend the locality meanwhile. Although
this preparatory operation was a complete
success, it was twice in danger of being com-
promised. The first occasion was when at the
last moment it was discovered by photographic
reconnaissance that one of the jungle clearings
earmarked for use and called “ Piccadilly ” had
been deliberately obstructed by the enemy.
The commanders on the spot decided to con-
tinue with the operation and divert the aircraft
intended for “ Piccadilly ” to the other landing
zone—‘ Broadway ”. Secondly, the towing of
gliders in pairs proved impracticable under the
difficult flying conditions encountered; tow
ropes snapped and a number of gliders failed
to reach their destination. Moreover there
existed in the clearing a number of undulations
not visible on air photographs, so that even
on making the best of landings the earlier
gliders frequently crashed, and each wrecked
glider became a source of danger for its
successors. Worse confusion and damage was
avoided by the airfield control improvised by
Lt.-Col. Allison of the U.S.A.AF. who was
able to stop the arrival of additional gliders.
Despite these difficulties, by the next night the
American airborne engineer unit and British
troops had levelled “ Broadway” sufficiently
for Dakotas (C.47) to land. The Air Com-
mander 3rd T.A.F. commented particularly on
the quality of the airfield control and the
excellent flying discipline that were features
of the operation, which enabled the strip to
be used almost to saturation by a constant
stream of transport aircraft in the short hours
of darkness available. His report remarks as
follows : “ Nobody has seen a transport opera-
tion until he has . . . watched Dakotas coming
in and taking off in opposite directions on a

single strip all night long at the rate of one -

landing or one take-off every three minutes ”,

SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 19 MARCH, 1951

37. By D plus 6 day there had been flown
in 9,052 personnel, 175 ponies, 1,183 mules and
509,083 pounds of stores.

38. The element of surprise which had
accompanied the entry of these forces and
which had been aided by diversionary bomb-
ing around Bhamo and Indaw was maintained
throughout. Even when the enemy divined
our intentions, our air superiority was instru-
mental in rendering his attacks ineffectual. It
was not until 11th March and 13th March
that the enemy attacked the two landing
grounds which had been first extemporised—
by which time one had already been evacuated
and a detachment of Spitfires of No. 81 Squad-
ron had been installed on the other. Other
landing strips were contrived as the occasion
arose, though for the most part the thirty
columns of the division were supplied by drop-
ping. Much of the effectiveness of this air
supply depended upon the standard of training
of the Dakota crews, The dropping zones
were continually being changed as the columns
moved from place to place. Delivery normally
took place by night and there was often no
ather guide than navigational skill supple-
mented by pre-arranged light signals which be-
came visible only when the aircraft arrived in
the vicinity of the dropping zone. Danger from
ground fire whilst dropping was a frequent and
accepted risk. This was no less true of occa-
sions on which Dakotas were able to utilise a
landing ground, for enemy detachments were
often in the neighbourhood. The strip opened
in the later stages of the operation at Hopin
was evacuated because of small arms fire
through which our aircraft had unavoidably
to pass before landing.

39. Before the advent of the rains made the
use of fairweather landing grounds impossible,
one Brigade (No. 16) was flown back to its
base in India. The others subsequently joined
the Chinese-American forces advancing upon
Myitkyina under General J. W. Stilwell, and
participated in the operations around Myit-
kyina, to whose success their columns, sup-
plied entirely by air, had contributed.

First Air Commando Unit.

40. This unit came to my command with
the specific duty of assisting the fly-in of
Special Force, the initial maintenance of its
columns and the evacuation of casualties.
These functions were extended to include direct
support of the ground forces and sustained
attacks on installations and communications
to hinder the eventual mobilisation of the
enemy against these forces. The Bomber-
Fighter component was engaged from the 3rd
February onwards in attacks on railways and ©
airfields and, as soon as the fiy-in had been
accomplished, in direct support when called
for by the columns. In these tasks the
Mustangs (P.51) flew 1,482 sorties and the
Mitchells (B.25) 422. Their claims against
enemy aircraft destroyed on the ground and
in the air amounted to ninety. The glider
component of the force carried out fourteen
separate operations involving the release of
99 gliders which took into Burma a variety of
equipment ranging from bulldozers to river-
craft. .

41. An important part was played in the
operation by the hundred light communication
aircraft which the Air Commando possessed.
