1384

the enemy continued to operate at his best
performance height, that is 10,000 feet. No.
436 Squadron, who re-equipped with these
aircraft in February, could not effectively em-
ploy their high overtaking speed against an
enemy who exploited the manoeuvrability of
his aircraft to the full. At first attacks were
delivered at too high a speed with a resultant
falling off in marksmanship.

23. When the battle switched to the Chind-
win front in the second week in March and it
became clear that the main Japanese ground
effort was to be aimed at Imphal and the rail-
way to the north, 243 Wing and eight squad-
rons were moved into the area from 224 Group.
Spitfires did not immediately repeat their suc-
cesses of the Arakan campaign for the follow-
ing reasons. Firstly, although the three Ground
Control Interception Stations were excellent
and brought off fine interceptions against
Dinahs (No. 81 Squadron scored their first
successes in this theatre by destroying two in
four days at. the beginning of March), the
rugged nature of the terrain produced techni-
cal difficulties in the way of echoes which left
many blank spots in the radar coverage.
Secondly, the substitution of Indian Mobile
Wireless Observer Companies for R.A.F. Wire-
less Units resulted in a lower standard of re-
porting. Thirdly, squadrons which had already
lost a number of experienced pilots in action
were now losing many more as operational
tours were completed. Moreover, the sudden
influx of personnel, both Army and R.AF.
could not be met with a similar growth of trans-
port, accommodation and communications.
Finally, as the Japanese advanced, more and
more of our early warning system was over-
run, and the Army Corps Commander decided
that he could not employ troops on local pro-
tection of airfields and the warning net. Squad-
don personnel became exhausted through dis-
turbed rest, and guard duties by night com-
bined with operations by day. Certain
squadrons were therefore withdrawn from the
Imphal Valley whilst others were flown out
every night.

24. Once again the problem of protecting
transport aircraft operating so near to Japanese
bases asserted itself. Deteriorating weather
and absence of warning made it increasingly
difficult to ensure interception, but that our
‘superiority was never lost is shown by the fact
that between the opening of the battle and the
end of May, thirty-one enemy aircraft were
destroyed, twenty probably destroyed and sixty-
six damaged in air combat over the Manipur
area, for the loss of seventeen. Of this num-
ber, three were destroyed by No. 176 (Beau-
fighter) Squadron operating at night from
advanced airfields near Imphal.

25. Meanwhile the accretion to the Com-
mand of long-range American fighter aircraft
enabled tactics to be developed which were
ito have most damaging results for the Japanese
Air Force. Already Mustangs (P.51) had
‘proved their worth, notably in a combined
victory with Kittyhawks (P.40) against an
‘enemy formation in the Digboi area on -27th
March, claiming 26 destroyed and 4 probably
‘destroyed, for the loss of two. The Amny re-
‘ported finding twenty-two crashed enemy air-
‘craft in the area after the interception. At
‘the same time, No. 459 (U.S.) Squadron,
equipped with Lightnings (P.38) began to

SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 19 MARCH, 1951

operate under 224 Group. Thus, it was pos-
sible to employ Lightnings (P.38) and Mus-
tangs (P.51) to supplement the work of the
Spitfires which were still in short supply, and
had to be husbanded for purely defensive work.
The serious contraction of the warning system
around Imphal could now be partly offset by
sending the American long range fighters to
intercept the enemy on his return to the Central
Irrawaddy strips.

26. The first success of the policy of intru-
sion fell to No. 1 Air Commando Force, which
surprised a large concentration of aircraft on
the Shwebo group of airfields on 8th March,
and destroyed 46 of them. Three days later,
the Lightnings (P.38) squadron scored 15
against the enemy at Heho. The primitive
nature of the Japanese warning system in the
area augured well for the successful continu-
ance of the operations. Pilots became increas-
ingly familiar with the details of those airfields
which were within range, and photographs and
models aided quick identification of dispersal
areas and anti-aircraft posts. In early strikes
of this nature the enemy were not airborne
and awaiting attack, and it was possible to
make more than one run over the target, the
first run being utilised to locate aircraft in their
dispersal pens.

27. In May, an improvement in the enemy’s
warning system became evident, since often
fighters were airborne and awaiting the attack.
However, losses remained low, since No. 459
Squadron discovered that if they maintained
an indicated airspeed of 300 m.p.h. and refused
to enter into combat with the slower and more
manoeuvrable Oscars and Tojos, they were
still able to deliver their attacks at aircraft
on the ground, perhaps fire one burst at any
fighter which attempted to intercept and make
their withdrawal without loss. The prospect
of combat during the intrusion therefore proved
no deterrent. In this manner No. 459 Squad-
ron destroyed 121 enemy aircraft on the
ground or in the air in March, April and May.
The enemy was forced in consequence to dis-
continue the use of the Shwebo group of air-
fields and even Heho and Meiktila became
practically untenable. By the end of May,
the J.A.F. had been forced into the humiliat-
ing position of providing such support as their
army, 600 miles away in the northern moun-
tains, could receive from the comparative
safety of airfields around Rangoon.

28. To sum up, the extent of Allied
superiority in the air throughout the period
can be seen by a comparison of the effort and
losses of the opposing forces. The enemy scale
of effort amounted to 2,700 sorties sighted or
plotted, or less than three per cent. of the
Allied effort. To achieve this, the J.AF. lost
402 aircraft destroyed in the air or on the
ground, or some 14 per cent. of their effort,
while the comparable total for British and
American forces amounted to 230 or less than
one-third per cent. of the effort. The air
superiority maintained over the period needs
no further emphasis.

* * * * * +

TI.—AiR TRANSPORT OPERATIONS
29. Throughout the period under review
the number of transport squadrons under my
command steadily increased, though their
growth was by no means out of proportion
