1382

Photographic Reconnaissance Force. Wing
Commander S. G. Wise, R.AF., was appointed
Air Commander from the date of formation.

5. In exercising operational control of these
forces, the integrity of U.S. Groups and R.AF.

Wings was retained and administrative control -

and responsibility remained with the respective
American and British Commanders. The
Chiefs of Stafi agreed to the integration with
the qualification that in view of American com-
mitments to China, it might become necessary
to transfer units from the 10th to the 14th
USAAF,

6. The chain of command and the conduct
of operations by the merged forces almost with-
out exception worked well, and mutual con-
cessions and adjustments were made by each
element. In ancillary services, examples of co-
operation were most notable in the sphere of
maintenance, signals and flying control. Major
General G. E. Stratemeyer has said in his re-
port on operations during this period—“ The
various obstacles which might be expected to
arise as a result of combining U.S.A.A.F. and
R.AF. units have been overcome as a result of
integration of staffs at Headquarters, Eastern
Air Command, Strategic Air Force, Third
Tactical Air Force, Troop Carrier Command
and Photographic Reconnaissance Force. Such
a revolutionary change in staff organisation
might well have produced many difficulties and
misunderstandings, but such has not been the
case, and we have undoubtedly derived mutual
benefit, not only on the staff side, but in the
tactical operating of air forces”. With these
and other evidences of the working of inte-
grated forces I have dealt in detail in the
appropriate sections of the narrative.

Tue TASKS TO BE ACCOMPLISHED.

7. The tasks which lay before the combined
Air Forces were: —

(a) To conduct a strategic air offensive in
conformity with the general plan to destroy
enemy air forces and installations, selected
rail, road and river communications, and
depois and maintenance facilities.

(b) To ensure the air defence of the U'S.
Air ‘fransport Command airfields in North-
East India and to provide for the defence
against air attack of Calcutta and adjacent
industrial areas.

(c) To provide support for the operations
of Fourteenth Army.

(d) To provide support for the Chinese-
American forces under command of General
J. W. Stilwell which were operating from
bases in the Ledo area.

(e) To support the operations of Long
Range Penetration forces, an:

(f} To conduct photographic
naissance and survey.

8. The prosecution of the first of these tasks
was not only the best method of maintaining a
favourable air situation, which was my prin-
cipal charge, but would also force the enemy
on the defensive and thus provide the best pro-
tection for the air route to China, for the
Caleutta area and for sea communications in
the northern Bay of Bengal.

9. Offensive fighter operations were to be
undertaken to the greatest possible extent and
it was proposed to use long range fighters in
particular in the offensive against enemy air-
fields and air installations. Moreover, in order

Tecon-

SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 19 MARCH, 1951

to overcome the wide dispersal of my avail-
able fighter strength, it was necessary to main-
tain at the highest pitch of efficiency the early
warning system.

10.1 planned to employ the strategic
bomber force against targets in the following
order of priority : enemy occupied airfields and
installations, shipping, railways, oil installations
in Burma and suitable objectives in Bangkok.
The course which the battle took, however,
made a readjustment of these priorities neces-
sary and a considerable proportion of the total
bomber effort was directed to tactical targets
in support of the Army and later, to carry
supplies to the garrison at Imphal. Another
task which assumed increasing importance
during the period was the evacuation of
casualties. Much had to be done to build up
a su organisation which could deal with
the transhipment of sick and wounded from
battle areas and casualty clearing stations to
better equipped hospitals in the rear.

Te Forces AVAILABLE.

11. To accomplish these tasks there was a
total of forty-eight R.A-F. and seventeen
U.S.A.A.F. squadrons deployed for operations.
By. May these totals had increased to sixty-four
and twenty-eight respectively.

12. The disposition of tactical units in
Bengal and Assam was designed to provide
defence and support over the three main areas
of land operations ; in the Arakan, along the
line from Tiddim to Homalin, and the Ledo
Sector in Northern Burma; they were under
the control of 224 Group, 221 Group and the
U.S.A.A.F. Northem Air Sector Force respec-
tively. Strategic units continued to be stationed
further to the west since the marshy areas of
the Sunderbunds and the poor lines of com-
munication in that area made the construction
of airfields east of the Brahmaputra up to
heavy bomber standards a matter of extreme
difficulty which neither the labour, transport
nor supply position would allow me to under-
take except as a relatively long term plan.

THE SITUATION IN NOVEMBER.

13. Facing the enemy from India there was
a more modern, more powerful, and numeri-
cally stronger air force than had hitherto been
available in this theatre. Moreover, during
the monsoon much had been achieved to give
the units comprising this force greater striking
power. Communications, although overstrained
were now better geared to carry war supplies
than at any time since the outbreak of hostili-
ties. Advanced landing grounds which had
been constructed afforded short-range aircraft
a greater radius of action, both offensive and
defensive, during the dry weather that was to
come and the warning system was now able to
give ample notice of the approach of hostile
aircraft.

14. The enemy for his part disposed of a
force of approximately 250 aircraft concen-
trated in the airfield groups at Heho, Anisakan,
Rangoon and Chiengmai with the remainder at
lay-back bases in Siam and the Netherlands
East Indies. His ground forces faced ours
along a front of 700 miles. In Arakan he held
the line from Maungdaw to Buthidaung and
was opposed by XV Corps, thence north-west
across the inhospitable Chin Hills to Kalemyo
and northwards up the Kabaw Valley where
