1402

complicated task. | Moreover, air transport
operations into the Imphal Valley could have
been intensified but for the low standard of
proficiency among the inexperienced controllers
on the few airfields available. Within these
limitations, however, much has been done, and
its value is evidenced by the fact that at the
only two airfields in 221 Group which could
be provided with proper fiying control, there
were in February no avoidable accidents
among the four squadrons accommodated
there.

173. In November there were only thirty
trained British Flying Control Officers in the
Command. This small body was reinforced by
forty resting aircrew and thirty I.A.F. officers.
There were forty main airfields along the re-
inforcement routes and in Ceylon, with no air-
field controllers, no trained airmen and very
little equipment, among which these personnel
were distributed.

174. In anticipation of the arrival of trained
controllers from England, plans were made to
institute a full Flying Control organisation in
the operational areas and along the reinforce-
ment routes by February. Unfortunately the
flow from U.K. was stopped in January and
the plan could not be implemented. " The
urgent needs of operational airfields had to be
met by stripping other areas below the safety
margin and diluting their establishment with
too high a proportion of I.A-F. officers. At the
end of May deficiencies on current establish-
ments amounted to 150 officers and 100 airfield
controllers.

175. One of the most encouraging features
of the development is the progress made to-
wards complete integration with the U.S.A.A.F.
Liaison has been pursued since September
1943, and in March of this year a joint con-
ference proposed the setting up of one system
of Air Traffic Control throughout the Com-
mand. A committee was set up to examine the
technical problems involved and make recom-
mendations. These included a Joint Flying
Control Board which will meet at intervals and,
it is hoped, maintain the unanimity achieved
by the initial committee. Application was
made to U.S.A.A.F. H.Q. to send to the Com-
mand officers trained in the joint system now
working in U.K.

176. I therefore anticipate that a unified
system of Flying Controi will soon be operat-
ing throughout the Command, and that every
crew will receive standard briefing and stan-
dard aids on all flights.

* * * * *

‘V.— ARMAMENT

177. The slow receipt and dissemination of
up-to-date information on armament matters,
as indeed in all technical branches, has hin-
dered the work of making the best use of
weapons and developing the striking power of
the Command. New publications take two
months to arrive and an even longer period to
reprint and distribute. One remedy has
an extensive use of the microgram service to
hasten the process of keeping technical per-
sonnel informed on all current developments.

178. Operational failures have been reduced
in spite of the fact that fighter squadrons do
not possess Armament Officers. It has been
found that the stoppage rates on squadrons

SUPPLEMENT ‘to THE LONDON GAZETTE, 19 MARCH, 1951

more than twenty miles from their Wing Arma-
ment Officer are from 1.5 to 2.5 times those on
squadrons less than twenty miles from the
wing. In spite of the fact that there are
established posts for only ten squadron Arma-
ment Officers in the Command, which are
naturally allotted to the bomber squadrons,
and that there are many establishment vacan-
cies which have not been filled because of the
serious shortage of armament officers, .303 gun
failures have fallen from 0.11 to 0.08 and
20 mm. from 2.07 to 1.48 per thousand rounds.
Bomb failures have similarly fallen from 0.47
to 0.25 per hundred bombs. The measures
which contributed to this improvement were a
decentralisation of the training and mainten-
ance branches, a better system of check on
failures, and careful distribution of available
manpower. To aid in this distribution a certain
dilution of I.A.F. personnel has been accepted.
These have proved suitable and efficient trades-
men at certain tasks and have enabled the
following dilution to be effected :
per cent.
(i) LA.F, Squadrons -. 100
Gi) M<U.s vee ae 50
(ii) Other non-operational

(iv) Operational R.A.F. Squad-
rons... wee wee
(provided British Other
Ranks are substituted
when available.)

179, A number of new weapons have arrived
in the Command and come into use, operation-
ally, during the period, Hurricane UD aircraft
armed with 40 mm. cannon first operated in
No. 20 Squadron in December, 1943. The
initial A.P. ammunition was supplemented in
February by H.E. which has proved very effec-
tive against rivercraft. R.P. has been used by
No. 211 Squadron since January. It was at
first employed against bridge targets, but the
delay fuse was found to be unsatisfactory for
this type of attack and no proper facilities
were available for modifying it. In view of
this, R.P. attacks have been directed against
rolling stock, transport convoys, oil instaila-
tions, factories and rivercraft with good effect.
500 lb. M.C. bombs came into use early in the
new year, and in addition to the supply to
Bengal, stocks have been built up at selected
stations in Southern India and Ceylon should
action become necessary against a Japanese
Naval Task Force. 2,000 lb. A.P. bombs have
been distributed for the same purpose.

180. A 4,000 Ib. bomb was dropped on
Burma for the first time in November, 1943,
against railway targets at Sagaing ; its employ-
ment since then has been extended both by
day and night. Among American weapons
which have been introduced since November
are parachute fragmentation bombs, 300 Ib.
spike bombs for use against railway lines, the
noses being of indigenous manufacture, and
the rocket-gun employed in the same manner
as the R.A-F. rocket-projectile.

181. Close liaison between British and
American Armament Staffs resulted in much
imter-change of information and resources.
American aircraft used R.A.F. flares and the
R.A.F. used American mines, incendiaries and
drift lights.

* * * * *
