1404

to the defence of its stations within the limit
of available resources.

192. By December, 1943, R.A.F. Regiment
personnel had been organised into units with
independent establishments. It was possible to
form only five field squadrons, the remaining
personnel being organised into A.A. flights
armed with light machine-guns, since there
were not enough officers nor the requisite
equipment to allow larger units to be formed.
These units functioned with considerable
efficiency and, in adition, station personnel
instructors drawn from the Regiment trained
in defence a large percentage of all personnel
in threatened areas.

193. By January, 1944, Army garrisons west
of the Brahmaputra had been withdrawn, but
no static garrisons had been provided for the
more vulnerable stations in either the 4 or 15
Corps’ areas. The local defence of these
stations depended entirely upon the few R.A-F.
Regiment Units and the station personnel.
Despite repeated representations, the reduction
of the Regiment to nearly half its initial
strength was insisted upon by Air Ministry,
and in February action to remuster personnel
to other trades was initiated. The results were
seen when in April the Air Commander, Third
Tactical Air Force, was obliged to withdraw a
number of operational squadrons from the
Imphal Valley. I had no alternative but to
direct that further reduction of the Regiment,
already down to 3,434 all ranks, should be
suspended. My Command Defence Officer was
sent to England in May to explain the circum-
stances and to request, not only that the
suspension of the Regiment reduction should
be confirmed, but that a force adequate for
the task of defending airfields and ancillary
stations in the battle areas should be provided.

194. I append a comment by the Air Com-
mander, Third Tactical Air Force, upon the
Regiment units under his control: —

“Units of the R.AF. Regiment have
proved themselves of the greatest value in
this campaign, of which the insecurity of air-
fields and warning establishments in forward
areas has been a feature. When Radar
Stations were established at St. Martin’s
Island and later in the Maungdaw area, the
unusual situation existed of Radar Stations
being actually well in advance of the front
line and within range of the enemy’s guns
and night patrols. It says much for the
R.A.F. Regiment personnel that the Radar
crews enjoyed undisturbed conditions in
which to carry on their work under such
trying conditions. It has proved to be quite
unsound to rely on the Army maintaining
troops for local defence in times of crisis
when the land situation deteriorates. This is
the time when they are really needed by us,
but this is the time when they are invariably
withdrawn to take part in the land battle”.

* * * = *

TX.—Am Sea RESCUE

195. The Air Sea Rescue organisation in this
Command has been based on that of the United
Kingdom, with the necessary adaptations for
local conditions and the scale of equipment that
is available. The responsibility for operations
has been delegated to the A.Os.C. of Groups,
to whom in tum the Group Controllers of

SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 19 MARCH, 1951

Naval Air Operations Rooms, keeping constant
watch, are responsible for initiating such
operations.

196. Officers responsible to their respective
A.Os.C. for the efficient arrangement of Air
Sea Rescue azd for keeping squadrons in-
formed of any new developments in methods
of search and ancillary equipment have been
established in Commands and Groups as
follows :—

Eastern Air Command—One Squadron

Leader.

Third T.A.F.—One Flight Lieutenant.
No. 225 Group—One Squadron Leader ;

One Flight Lieutenant.

No. 222 Group—One Squadron Leader.

197. Twelve Warwicks have now after some
delay arrived in India and are undergoing
major overhaul at Karachi, Allahabad and Jes-
sore. Seven Sea Otters are being off-loaded
at Karachi and crews have been detailed to
take a conversion course as soon as the air-
craft become serviceable. When they are
ready for operational flying, these aircraft will
join No. 292 Squadron, the Headquarters of
which will be at Jessore. .

198. Meaawhile searches have been carried
out by the four Walruses already in the Com-
mand, and by operational aircraft, which, when-
ever possible, carry the Lindholme Dinghy
Gear. Experiments are being made to fit this
gear to Liberators.

199. Little progress has been made in the
formation of A.S.R. marine craft and Units.
This is chiefly due to the slow rate at which
launches have been delivered. By July, 1943,
there were nine in the Command. Between
this date and January 1944 no more arrived,
and as a consequence no additional units could
be formed. With the improvement, however,
in the shipping position, four launches have
recently arrived from the United Kingdom and
four from the U.S.A. There has also been
notification of another seventeen being shipped
to this Command.

200. Air Sea Rescue Units have been formed
or are now in the process of forming at the
following places: Chittagong, Maiakhal
Island, Calcutta, Dhamra River, Vizagapatam,
Madras, Cochin, Bombay, Karachi, China Bay,
Colombo, Galle, Kayts (Jaffna), Jiwani and
Jask (iraq). The craft, however, allocated
to most of these units have not yet arrived in
the Command, or are still being fitted out and
so are not yet operational.

201. The maintenance of these craft has been
a difficult problem owing to the limited supply
of spares and special tools, to the great dis-
tances between operational areas and the over-
haul workshops, and to the lack of transport
that prevails. The problem has been met by
using naval facilities where possible for ship-
ping and engine overhauls and by locating
Tescue craft by types, so that they are within
as easy reach as possible of the workshops cap-
able of doing the overhaul of their respective
types of engines.

202. Thirty-seven aircraft in all were
searched for. The number of aircrew personnel
in these aircraft was 168, of which 102 were
saved. An American amphibious Catalina,
based on Calcutta, was responsible for two
ocean landings and the saving of twenty-one
