1406

personnel live in scattered communities on the
eastern marches of India, housed in bamboo
huts or tents, often widely dispersed in small
groups of less than a hundred, and generally
at least a day’s journey from the nearest centre
of what to them represents civilisation, and
perhaps even from the nearest R.A.F. unit.

‘o ameliorate as far as possible the drab and
lonely life inevitable under these circumstances,
170 gramophones and 363 wireless sets have
been made available during the period and
distributed at special rates to units. It is the
aim ultimately to provide a wireless set for
every hundred men. Special arrangements
have also been made for the distribution of
books and the supply of sports gear. Cor-
respondence courses which have been made
accessible for airmen at a specially low fee
have been meeting a heavy demand. Six
mobile cinemas have been set up in Bengal
to which the average attendance is 15,000
weekly, and touring concert parties have visited
many units,

214. No single factor has conduced more
to ill-feeling between the airman and the people
of the country in which he is living than the
uncontrolled operation of the laws of supply
and demand at a time when so many men
whose standards of self-respect and personal
cleanliness are high were arriving, and stocks
of tooth-paste, shoe polish and razor blades
were short. The rise in the price of such
essential goods was aggravated by the fact that
there is in India no NAAFI. to cater for
the essential needs of the serviceman, the Gov-
ermment of India preferring to retain the con-
tractor system. Thus the only possible obstacle
to the exploitation of the airman by bazaar
store-keepers has been a progressively more
rigid supervision of local canteen contractors.
The problem has been made easier during
the last few months by the provision from
abroad of large stocks of essential articles
which are disseminated through service
channels and sold at controlled prices in can-
teens. The problem is now one of distribution
rather than supply and in general it may be
said that the airman can buy essential com-
modities at fair prices in his canteen—though
not yet at all times or in all units.

215. Without the services of N.A.A-F.L, the
provision of entertainment parties from
‘England proved impossible for a long period.
The Government of India have finally been
prevailed upon to allow E.N.S.A. parties to
perform in this country, and G.H.Q., India,
has partly defrayed the cost from excess
canteen profits.

_ 216. Other advances which may be men-
tioned include the improved scales of accom-
modation and furnishings which have been
sanctioned for Hill Depots, and the development
of airmen’s clubs. The number of beds avail-
able for personnel on leave has practically
doubled during the past year, and Hill Depots
have been made as informal as possible with
no parades at all and a minimum of restric-
tions. In spite of this, approximately 70 per
cent. of airmen still prefer to spend their leave

- panies under training.

SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 19 MARCH, 1951

in towns. I cannot see any alteration in this
proportion until travelling facilities on Indian
railways vastly improve, and proceeding to
distant leave centres becomes less of an ordeal.
The unhealthy nature of most large Indian
towns makes this improvement even more
desirable.

217. Assistance has been given by my Wel-
fare Staff to 915 airmen in need of advice or
undergoing avoidable hardship, in addition to
the many cases handled by the welfare officers
in subordinate formations. The provision of
amenities has continued with grants from the
Amenities, Comforts and Entertainments for
the Forces Fund, while the Royal Air Force
Welfare Grant has been received from Ist April
onwards. To deal with the growing scope of
welfare duties, six selected airmen have been
commissioned in the A. & S.D. (Welfare)
Branch and five welfare officers with the rank
of Squadron Leader have arrived from the
United Kingdom.

XII.—INDIAN OBSERVER CORPS

218. In November, 1943, the Indian Observer
Corps consisted of three control units, six
mobile companies in Bengal, static units in four
main areas, Calcutta, Chittagong, Vizagapatam
and Madras, and fourteen other mobile com-
These together with
Care & Maintenance companies and training
centres made up a total strength of 10,851 per-
sonnel. In December it was decided to break
down the static organisation and certain Care
and Maintenance formations, and form from
them seven additional mobile companies. By
May, 1944, the number of control units had
increased to four, and that of operational
mobile companies to seventeen with ten others
under training or in process of formation.

219. During the battle in Arakan, four com-
panies were involved, and re-deployment of a
number of posts was necessary. Such posts as
were forced to retire succeeded in destroying
their equipment before retreating. Similarly,
when the enemy advanced towards Imphal,
nearly 50 posts had to be evacuated or re-
deployed. The posts east and south of Imphal
naturally lost much equipment, but a high. per-
centage was saved and all abandoned equip-
ment was denied to the enemy. Casualties, too,
were light in view of the little or no warning
provided, consisting of some six missing and
six others wounded.

220. Experience gained during the period led
at the end of April to the substitution of
Mobile Control Units for the Base and Forward
Control Units, with resultant closer supervision
and greater flexibility. Ultimately there will be
seven of these to control the seventeen com-
panies, and each of the latter will control
fifteen observer posts. :

R. E. C. Pemse,

Air Chief Marshal,
Allied Air Commander-in-Chief.

23rd November, 1944.
Air Command, South East Asia.
