SUPPLEMENT To THs LONDON GAZETTE, 19 MARCH, 1951

VI.—TRaINING

182. The re-orientation of the training
organisation early in the period allocated
responsibility on a geographical basis, and No.
227 Group was no longer regarded primarily
as the training group. From January onwards,
each group supervised and administered train-
ing within its own area.

183. Much of the available resources have
been absorbed by the need to convert crews
to the latest types of aircraft, since reinforce-
ments arriving in the Command have not been
familiarised with these types, and many exist-
ing squadrons are re-equipping. The change-
over from Vengeances to Mosquitoes, from
Wellingtons to Liberators and from Hurricanes
to Thunderbolts are the outstanding examples.
As a result, it is hoped that there will be five
trained Liberator and nine Thunderbolt
squadrons by November, and two Mosquito
squadrons by October. Wastage replacement
crews are trained concurrently and provide a
valuable reserve without calling upon outside
assistance.

184. Refresher flying training was provided
at Poona for 614 aircrew either newly arrived
in the Command or returning to operations
after a period of rest. Air Gunner Instructor
courses, LA.F, ab initio W/Op. A.G. courses
and R.A-F. Pilot Refresher courses have been
carried out continuously at Bairagarh in
Bhopal where two LA.F. squadrons (Nos. 3
and 9) also completed armament and gunnery
training. The Air Fighting Training Unit
gave advanced courses on tactics and gunnery
control, through which 71 pilots and 83 gun-
nery leaders passed, and which were attended
by many U.S.A.AF. personnel. No. 22 Arma-
ment Practice Camp carried out six bomber
and fighter refresher courses, one of which was
attended by No. 459 Squadron U.S.A.AF.
whose results improved markedly during the
course, No. 231 Group Navigation School
passed 420 aircrew through its courses.

185. LA.F. G.D. recruiting did not come up
to expectations. The following table of out-
put during the period indicates the scale of
LAF. production and wastage :

From LT.W. 224
From E.E.T.S. : . 101
From S.F.T.S. we wee 80
From O.T.U. . 113

186. Ground training was mainly of LAF.
personnel, of whom 8,049 were admitted to
Recruit Training Centres. A fraction over
9,000 I.0.R.s were under training of all kinds
at the end of the period. One important
task, the training of flight mechanics, was
taken over from the Director of Civil Aviation,
and as a result the civilian schools were closed
or taken over as Schools of Technical Training.

* = * * *

VII.—INTERNAL AIR ROUTES

187. The formation early in December of
No. 229 Group of Transport Command enabled
me to introduce a stricter supervision of in-
ternal transport flying, passenger and freight
services, and of the movement of aircraft in
India and Ceylon. The need for this had
long been apparent but the means had been
lacking. One of the more positive results of
the decentralisation of control I was able to
make was a reduction in the accident rate for

1403

the aircraft which came under No. 229 Group’s
control from 46 per 10,000 in December, 1943,
to 13 in May, 1944.

188. The number of aircraft available for
internal services continued to be small in com-
parison with requirements and the distances in-
volved. Since it was necessary to earmark
nearly all Dakotas for the replacement of
wastages in squadrons operating at pressure on
the Eastern frontier, the formation of another
transport squadron (the sixth) had to be con-
tinually postponed, and the conversion of No.
353 Squadron from Hudsons to Dakotas de-
layed. This squadron, based on Palam at
Delhi, together with the B.O.A.C. and the few
aircraft belonging to Indian civil air lines, was
all I could make available for the Air Routes.
No. 229 Group’s task was thus no easy one.
In the six months from December to May,
Hudson aircraft of No. 353 Squadron flew
7,570 hours on transport work. The age of the
Hudsons makes this a creditable figure. It
was only achieved by a high standard of main-
tenance and by using as engine spares such
parts from obsolete Mohawks as were avail-
able. Six Dakotas were also made available
to the squadron in April and May as a de-
tached flight based on Dum Dum. They flew
860 hours in these two months on services
between Calcutta, Colombo and Bombay.
This flight was given concurrently two Dakotas
to maintain a service to China which had
formerly been carried out by No. 31 Squadron.
Thus this one squadron was operating services
extending from Ceylon to Kunming and
Calcutta to Bombay.

189. Ferrying and the movement of rein-
forcing aircraft accounted for an average of
over 1,300 aircraft deliveries a month within
the Command. These flights were used to the
fullest extent to supplement the internal air
services. By this means, over 1,060 passengers
and 500,000 pounds of freight were flown from
Karachi alone.

190. I am glad to say that trunk routes to
the United Kingdom have been vastly in-
creased. The weekly R.A.F. Liberator service
from Karachi has been doubled and a weekly
service by R.A.F. Dakota from Colombo has
been started. In May a B.O.A.C. Sunderland
began to ply twice weekly from Calcutta. For
communications with the Mediterranean there
has been since March a B.O.AC. Ensign
service three times a week between Cairo and
Calcutta. The establishment of No. 229 Group
in my Command, followed by a personal visit
of the A.O.C.-in-C. Transport Command and
many representatives of his staff has been
amongst the happiest auguries for the future
that I have to record in this Despatch.

* * * * *

VIIL—R.A.F. REGIMENT

191. The strength of the R.A.F. Regiment
throughout has been insufficient to justify the
acceptance of full responsibility for the local
defence of Royal Air Force Stations and to
meet the threat of infiltration by enemy ground
raiding parties to airfields and Radar stations.
A remedy was sought in November, 1943,
whereby the Army agreed to withdraw all
static garrisons from R.A.F. stations in areas
remote from enemy action, and to provide
them at stations where attack was possible.
The R.A.F. was to have made a contribution
