SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 19 MARCH, 1951

to the continually increasing importance of
their task in the operational areas. Indeed,
it is not too much to say that their services
were instrumental in preserving the existence
of the Fourteenth Army as a striking force on
the Burma frontier. Operations on the Eastern
front made calls upon them at an ever in-
creasing rate, so that despite reinforcement,
transport squadrons worked at a high rate of
effort from the moment they became opera-
tional. In consequence, crews underwent a
period of considerable strain, for not only
does supply dropping in this theatre involve
intricate low flying over the dropping zone
for as much as an hour in a hot aircraft in-
terior, but the crews were normally responsible
for the arduous work of unloading 6,000 to
7,000 Ibs. of freight.

Development of Troop Carrier Command.

30. In November, the only R.A-F. transport
squadron operating was No. 31, an experienced
and pioneer unit, but the Ist and 2nd Troop
Carrier Squadrons U.S.A.A.F. had begun to
work over the northern sector of the front
and there were other squadrons both British
and American, either in training or on their
way. Unified operational control of these
forces was effected by the institution in
December of Troop Carrier Command, Eastern
Air Command, under Brigadier General W. D.
Old, U.S.A.A.F., administrative control re-
maining in the usual British or American
channels.. Headquarters was _ established
at Comilla on 2nd January, 1944, in close
proximity to the Headquarters of Fourteenth
Army and of the Third Tactical Air Force, as
well as to main Army supply bases. Sub-
sequent operations illustrated the dependence
of air transport operations upon the tactical
air situation, and in order to combine final
responsibility for the former with the exercise
of our air superiority—as well as to integrate
air transport with army policy—Troop Carrier
Command was placed under the control of
the Air Commander, Third Tactical Air Force,
from Ist May. Subsequently Troop Carrier
Command was dissolved as from 4th June,
by when its component squadrons numbered
8—4 R.A. and 4 U.S.A.A.F. Moreover, in
February the Air Transport Command had
loaned to'me twenty-two Commandos (C.46)
to meet the emergency in the Arakan, and
when it became necessary to return these in
April, five US.A.A-F. Troop Carrier squad-
rons and the larger part of 216 Squadron
R.A.F, were detached to work with my Com-
mand from M.A.A.F. Upon their return to
the Mediterranean theatre in June, aircraft and
crews from the Strategic Air Force were
attached to the Third Tactical Air Force to fill
the gap until the first of the U.S.A.A.F. Com-
bat Cargo Groups became operational.
During its short but eventful life of little over
six months, Troop Carrier Command had thus
increased more than four-fold in size, and even
more in significance.

31. The routine supply dropping missions of
No. 31 Squadron over the Chin Hills and
Arakan were being continued at the time of
the formation of South East Asia Command.
The first additional need was that of 81 (West
African) Division which already in December
received supplies landed for it at Chiringa
by U.S.A.AF. It then moved eastwards over
the mountains to the Kaladan Valley at

1385

Daletme and began its advance southwards,
being dependent throughout for its mainten-
ance upon air supply. From 7th January,
1944, onwards, this became a commitment of
No. 62 Squadron R.AF. At the same time
U.S.A.A.F. aircraft came to the help of No.
31 Squadron in building up a large reserve
of supplies at Tiddim, while further north,
Nos. 1 and 2 Troop Carrier Squadrons
U.S.A.AF. in addition to maintaining the air
warning centres screening the Assam Valley,
began to supply on a much larger scale the
two Chinese Divisions advancing south-east
from Ledo down the Hukawng Valley. They
also gave help to the Kachin levies waging
guerrilla warfare in the Fort Hertz district, as
well as to the Gurkha garrison of Fort Hertz
itself.

The Arakan Battle—February, 1944.

32. When the Japanese offensive in the
Arakan opened on 4th February, the needs of
the 14th Army for air supply greatly expanded
with only a few days’ warning. The land
communications of 7th Indian Division were
soon cut and those of 5th Indian Division in
danger, and it was only by supply dropping
that the encircled forces could be expected
to stand their ground and turn a potential
catastrophe into a decisive victory. Japanese
preparations for an offensive had been ob-
served, however, and the possibility of en-
circlement envisaged, so that when supply by
air was called for on 8th February, there was
no delay.

33. On the first day some of our transport
aircraft encountered an enemy fighter sweep
and one was shot down. Such was our air
superiority that throughout the Arakan opera-
tions this was the only loss sustained by trans-
port aircraft from enemy fighters, although
many aircraft were damaged by fire from the
ground. Later, as a measure of protection,
much of the supply dropping was done by

‘night with but little falling off in efficiency.

The operation while it lasted was of such
unexpected magnitude that I was compelled
to request the loan of a number of Commandos
(C.46) from the India-China Wing of the U.S.
Air Transport Command. These aircraft were
promptly and unstintingly supplied. The
critical period from the 8th February to 6th
March inclusive involved the delivery of 2,010

‘short tons of supplies of all kinds, including

rations, animals, ammunition and P.O.L.'
With such large scale help, ground forces were
able to break out of their encirclement and
inflict a decisive defeat on the enemy—-signifi-
cant in that it pointed the way towards the
neutralisation of the long familiar Japanese
offensive tactics. By the end of the month, air
supply to the Arakan, though it still continued,
was no longer of an emergency nature.

Operation “ Thursday”.

34. The major offensive action planned and
carried out by 14th Army before the onset
of the monsoon, was a penetration of enemy-
occupied territory by columns of Special Force
under Major General O. C. Wingate. _ Its
purpose was to disrupt enemy communications
and thereby aid the recapture of northern
Burma and create a favourable situation for
the 14th Army to exploit. The operation as

* Petrol, Oil, Lubricants.

