SUPPLEMENT To THs LONDON GAZETTE, 19 MARCH, 1951

activities of the Army elements on the air-
fields, and to organise the flow of Army sup-
plies both from base to airfield and from air-
field to aircraft. These developments did not,
however, reach completion during the period
covered by this despatch.

* * * * * *

TI.—Strratecic Air Force

57. Operations by heavy and medium bom-
bers sought to accomplish the following tasks:

@ Denial and destruction of the enemy's
lines of communication.

Gi) Destruction of airfields and other mili-
tary installations.

Gii) Destruction of industrial and stores
areas.

58. In addition to these, the Strategic Air
Force was often called upon to furnish direct
support to ground forces and to provide air-
craft and crews for transport operations.

59. For the transhipment of sea-borne sup-
plies to Burma, there were available to the
enemy the ports of Rangoon, Moulmein, Tavoy
and Mergui; the three latter are all connected
by rail or road to Rangoon. In addition to
these, the enemy could use the port of Bangkok
and two lesser ports in the Gulf of Siam, Koh
Sichang and Sattahib, both with adequate com-
munications to Bangkok. From here the vital
Burma-Siam railway, which was completed
about the beginning of the period under re-
view, could transport supplies to Moulmein,
thence across the Salween by ferry to
Martaban, rail again to the Sittang River where
the bridge was down, once again a ferry, and
so to all points of use by rail. Among the
measures designed to deny these facilities to
the enemy was the laying of a total of 89 mines
in the harbours of Rangoon, Moulmein, Tavoy
and Mergui, and, further afield, at Bangkok
and the Gulf of Siam ports. Though the num-
ber of mines laid was not large, the results
exceeded expectations. Moreover, it must be
remembered that the effort involved was con-
siderable, sometimes necessitating flights of
2,300 miles. The enemy’s lack of efficient
minesweeping equipment caused much delay
in the clearance of harbours, and intelligence
reports show that considerable dislocation and
damage was caused to shipping.

60. Attacks against rail communications
accounted for almost 25 per cent. of all opera-
tions. Destruction of the larger installations
was allotted to the heavy bombers, with parti-
cular emphasis on Rangoon, Bangkok and
Mandalay. Wellingtons operating by night
were directed mainly against railway centres.
The Mitchells’ (B.25) performance and charac-
teristics made them particularly suitable for
railway sweeps and the destruction of bridges.
In this connection, the spiked bombs that came
into use in March proved invaluable and were
used to tear up stretches of the permanent way
at intervals over many miles of track. Bridges
of strategic importance were attacked con-
tinuously and attacks were repeated each time
the enemy completed repair work. An ex-
cellent example of this was the Sittang Bridge
at Mokpalin. Destroyed during the evacua-
tion from Burma, the bridge was repaired after
long and arduous work by the enemy. The
progress of the work was carefully followed
by reconnaissance, and as soon as it was com-
pleted the bridge was wrecked once more in

1389

a single operation. It has not been repaired
since this attack.

61. The overall strategy of rendering each
part of the railway system ineffective was ex-
emplified in the spirited low-level attack on the
Burma-Siam railway by American Liberators
(B.24), the series of attacks on marshalling
yards at Bangkok and Moulmein, and the
mining of the ferry crossings at Martaban and
Mokpalin. At shorter range, the railway from
Rangoon to Myitkyina was subject to con-
tinuous attacks, with the result that throughout
its length there was always one bridge or more
out of action. Amongst these bridges which
were put out of action were the Mu River,
Myittha, Meza, Kyungon, Zawchaung, Budalin,
Songon, Natmauk, Tantabin, Swa, Tangon,
Ye-u, Sinthe, Pyu, Bawgyo, Pyawbwe,
Myingatha, Natkyigon, Daga and Myothit.
Whenever intelligence indicated that enemy
troops or supplies were moving in quantity.
sweeps were undertaken along the stretches of
track approaching the battle fronts.

62. Attacks on road facilities and communi-
cations began in earnest in April 1944, when
the threat to the Imphal Plain assumed serious
proportions. One enemy division moving north
from the Tiddim area had, as its main line
of supply, the motor road leading from Ye-u.
Two other divisions attacking from the east
across the Chindwin were largely dependent
upon the road from Wuntho. Mitchells (B.25)
and Wellingtons began on the 18th April an
almost daily assault upon these vital arteries
and the supplies moving along them. While
the former carried out low-level daylight
sweeps, the latter took up the réle of intruders
by night, replacing Beaufighters which Third
Tactical Air Force considered could not be
usefully or economically employed on moon-
less nights. The sum of these attacks, other
aspects of which I have described elsewhere in
this Despatch, contributed greatly to the con-
stant shortage and slow transit of men and
supplies which dogged the enemy throughout
his offensive.

63. The effort by strategic bombers to
neutralise the Japanese Air Force was directed
primarily to the destruction of airfield instal-
lations and supplies. At the beginning of
February a large-scale operation by night was
undertaken against the Heho group of air-
fields in conjunction with Beaufighters, who
were to follow up the attack at dawn. From
the Strategic Air Force point of view, the
operation was highly successful, photographs
revealing many bomb patterns in vulnerable
areas. The Beaufighter attacks were ham-
pered, however, by early morning mist.

64. Of industrial targets, oil installations
were one of the primary objectives. A con-
centrated bombing programme was carried out
against facilities at Yenangyaung in which
American daylight bombers demonstrated their
accuracy to such an extent that twice Beau-
fighters operating in the area the following
night reported large fires still burning. In
late 1943 this plant was producing 600 barrels
of crude oil daily, from which were extracted
5,000 gallons of petrol. By May, 1944, the
daily processed yield had been reduced to
1,680 gallons. Installations at Chauk, Lanywa,
and Thilawa were dealt with in a like fashion.
Attacks against other industrial areas were
reserved for the few large towns where targets
