SUPPLEMENT To tos LONDON GAZETTE, 19 MARCH, 1951

bombs carried by light bombers and fighter-
bombers did little damage unless they made
direct hits, and the use of medium and heavy
bombers for the task was of necessity re-
Stricted. Moreover, when heavy attacks were
carried out with the help of the Strategic Air
Force no really decisive success was achieved,
and as yet the Army has not been able to
make an effective assault in conjunction with
these attacks. What advantage medium and
heavy bombers have in the weight of their
blow is offset ‘by -their greater margin of
bombing error, which makes it necessary to
allow a safety margin and so forces’ troops
to start their assault at a greater distance from
their objective than is the case with light
bombers and fighter-bombers. A good ex-
ample of the difficulty of co-operation between
heavy bombers and ground forces is given in
the operation at Razabil, which is described
later. Of such attacks, the Air Commander,
Third Tactical Air Force, noted in his report
for this period: “The Army have not yet
been able to carry out an effective assault
in conjunction with these attacks.... How-
ever, the accession of Mitchells in a forward
location and under Third Tactical Air Force
is expected to be a very considerable help in
enabling us to put an adequate and timely
weight of attack on . . . strongpoints ”.

74, Another way in which such bombing
assisted ground forces was in disclosing the
enemy’s positions by clearing thick under-
growth from around them. This tactic was of
great assistance to our artillery and tanks, but
was inclined to be a double-edged weapon in
the opinion of the infantry, since not only
was the enemy exposed to view, but their own
line of advance was also stripped of cover
so that they were forced to attack either at
night or by a flanking movement.

75. The technique of air attack was deter-
mined by the nature of the terrain in which
the target lay. Where thick jungle made
approach necessary at a height sufficient to
locate the target by reference to its surround-
ings, then dive or shallow-dive-bombing was
used. When the location of targets, as for
instance on the lines of communication, was
not so difficult, then low-level attacks could
be carried out. Dive-bombers therefore and
fighter-bombers were used principally against
pin-points and specified areas, the ground
attack fighters against concentrations of troops
and supply dumps immediately to the rear.

76. The results of attacks made in ground
support could not always be observed from
the air, but an analysis of the reports of Army
units that followed up the attacks or watched
them as they took place, testifies to their
effectiveness in terms of men and animals killed
and positions weakened, if not destroyed.
Although great destruction of life was not
necessarily the primary object of these attacks
and was not always achieved, the Army was
unanimous in its belief that the air support
given helped it to advance when the initiative
was ours and to hold out and later counter-
attack when the enemy were attacking. Army
formations repeatedly expressed their thanks
to the air force units that had helped them,
and further tribute to the effectiveness of this
support is to be found in many reports. One
of these may be quoted as being typical of
many others: “10th May air strike on

1391

Japanese in Lynch position (near Tengnoupal)
reported by forward troops to be most success-

Bunkers were seen to be blown in and
bodies flying about”. This was the work of
twelve aircraft of No. 42 Squadron.

77, A more intangible result of direct sup-
port was the effect that it had on the morale
of our troops. It was the opinion, for instance,
of the Commander of the garrison at Kohima
in April, that the audible and visible evidence
of the arrival of air support on the two critical
days, the 15th and 18th April, put new heart
into his men towards the end of the siege.
The obverse side of the picture is given by
ptisoners of war who bore complete witness to
the effectiveness of our bombing and machine
gunning.

* * * * *

78. In November and December, squadrons
gave the limited scale of support called for
by Fourteenth Army, which was then occupied
in regrouping for forthcoming operations.

79. In the 4 Corps area the enemy advanced
into the Chin Hills and occupied the line Fort
White—Falam—Haka. They were held south
of Tiddim, and both sides spent the rest of the
year consolidating their positions. ing this
phase Nos. 45‘and 110 Vengeance Squadrons
did good work in direct support and in
destroying supply dumps particularly around
the area of Milestone 52 on the Tiddim—
Kalemyo road.

80. During the same period in the Arakan,
15 Corps was also regrouping in preparation
for an advance, and many attacks were made
on enemy positions in order to inflict casualties
and disperse enemy troops. Among the targets
successfully attacked were the Headquarters
of the Japanese 55th Division at Rathedaung.

81. In January the rate of effort increased
to support the several intended thrusts forward.
4 Corps took the offensive during this month,
and on the 25th occupied Kyaukchaw in the
Atwin Yomas, an enemy fortress that blocked
their line of advance from Tamu to Yuwa on
the Chindwin. From the air point of view
this was the most interesting operation of the
month, since the first ground assault was pre-
ceded by an air attack in which aircraft of
both the Strategic and Tactical Air Forces took
part. Eighteen U.S. Liberators (B.24) and nine
Mitchells (B.25) escorted by R.A.F. fighters,
dropped thirty-five tons of bombs including
depth-charges ; twenty-four Vengeances and
twelve Hurricanes dropped eighteen tons. The
bombing was accurate and the whole area of
jungle and undergrowth was covered. On the
other hand there were no direct hits on bunker
positions, and the near misses did little damage
to personnel or to positions. The attack too!
place at 16.30 hours in the afternoon, but the
Army did not advance until 08.30 hours the
next morning, by which time the effect of the
bombing had mainly worn off. The unintended
result of the operation, therefore, was that the
Army’s advance was made more difficult by
the lack of cover where blast had laid the
undergrowth flat.

82. Meanwhile in Arakan, 15 Corps had
begun to move forward shortly before
Christmas towards the line Indin—Kyauktaw.
At the beginning of January, Maungdaw was
taken and the approach towards the Maung-
daw—Buthidaung road was continued till the
