SUPPLEMENT to tHE LONDON GAZETTE, 19 MARCH, 1951

to the investigation of enemy radar by two
specially equipped Liberators allotted to my
Command. Twenty-six sorties were flown
from Ceylon to the Andaman Islands, Car
Nicobar, Simalur, and Northern Sumatra. Con-
clusive evidence was obtained on these flights
that the enemy employ in this theatre beam-
swept radar of the type found on Attu and
Guadalcanal. At the end of April the air-
craft were transferred from Ceylon to Bengal
in order to operate along the Burma coastline
and in the Bangkok area, but the results of
their investigations have not been sufficiently
conclusive to be included in this despatch.

132. Searches carried out by coastal aircraft
during the period assisted in the location and
rescue of a total of 535 survivors from tor-
pedoed vessels in the waters around India.

133. The results of coastal activity are
seldom tangible, and an account of the work
of forces engaged on this work must of neces-
sity draw attention to those occasions when the
enemy’s positive attacks overcame the efforts of
negative reconnaissance. Stich attacks in the
area patrolled by India and Ceylon-based air-
craft did not and could not meet with sufficient
reaction to provide a continual deterrent to the
enemy’s intrusions, nor was the rate of destruc-
tion of submarines high enough to prove a
serious obstacle to him, since the maximum
forces available in India and Ceylon during
the period consisted of ten long-range and
three medium-range squadrons.

* * * * * *

VII.—PHOTOGRAPHIC RECONNAISSANCE

134. In November it was the intention that
No. 681 and 684 P.R. Squadrons should
eventually come under the control of Strategic
Air Force. To this end No. 171 Wing, which
had originally been formed as a Tactical Re-
connaissance Wing, was moved from Southern
India to take over administrative and opera-
tional control. The 9th P.R. Squadron,
US.A.AF., was still under the control of
10th U.S. Army Air Force.

135. No really long-range reconnaissance
had been carried out by this time, since No.
684 Squadron had only recently received
Mosquitoes, and there had not been time to
explore the potentialities of this aircraft under
tropical conditions. The radius of P.R. cover
on the Ist December, excluding the Andaman
Islands, was only 680 miles. On 15th
December the first cover of Bangkok was
obtained and provided much valuable informa-
tion regarding Japanese dispositions and their
use of lay-back airfields. Although Bangkok
is now a routine target, the sortie was at
that time an outstanding achievement, since the
range of the Mosquito in this climate was still
undetermined.

136. At this time the main réle of the two
squadrons was to provide airfield cover for
aircraft counts, to photograph communications
and areas indicated by the Army, and to cover
potential target areas for attacks in Burma.
Twice weekly sorties were flown to Port Blair
in the Andamans to secure information on the
enemy’s anti-shipping activities. In January
one of the few Mitchells (B.25) belonging to
No. 684 Squadron photographed Mergui on
the Tenasserim Coast for the first time, involv-
ing a journey of 1,600 miles. Survey photo-
graphy was also begun during the month to

(11548)

1397

meet a long-felt need for accurate and up-to-
date maps of Burma. By the end of May, not
only immediate battle areas had been sur-
veyed, but also approximately 57 per cent. of
the whole of the country. The remainder of
the effort was absorbed in assessing the extent
to which communication facilities were being
used and the damage inflicted upon them. The
record number of eighty airfields were covered.
in one day, as was the greater part of the
Burma railway system, allowing of an accurate
aircraft count and a reliable estimate of the
engines and rolling-stock in the country. An-
other valuable result of the large-scale airfield
cover was the issue of target mosaics to long-
range fighter squadrons, which proved of great

assistance, especially when airfields were
attacked.
137. Meanwhile,’ the American PR.

squadron equipped with Lightnings (F.5) was
still working independently. This often re-
sulted in duplication of effort, and closer co-
ordination was clearly desirable. Thus on the
Ist February, Photographic Reconnaissance
Force was formed, incorporating No. 171 Wing
Headquarters. This month and March were
notable for many sorties to obtain airfield in-
formation and to assess the damage to com-
munications by aircraft of Third Tactical Air
Force and No. 1 Air Commando Force.
Survey work was also carried out, together
with regular flights to the Andamans and the
vast area bounded by a line joining Kentung,
Sittang, Mergui and Koh Si Chang Island
(South-East of Bangkok).

138. Small country-craft were now being
increasingly used by the enemy, and the water-
ways of the Arakan and Central Burma were
also frequently photographed to assess the
density of traffic and staging points. On
27th March the longest flight yet, of 1,860
miles, was achieved by a Mosquito of No. 684
Squadron when a large stretch of the Bangkok-
Singapore railway was covered.

139. In April a substantial increase in the
number of Army requests entailed numerous
sorties over the battle and reinforcement areas,
A Mosquito improved upon the record flight
of the previous month by photographing many
stretches of railway in the Malay Peninsula,
flying 2,172 miles to do so.

140. The advent of the monsoon affected
photographic reconnaissance work perhaps
more than any. In May, instead of concentrat-
ing on the programmes laid down, it became
a question of finding areas where the weather
was best and photographing the highest
priority targets in them.

141. The outstanding achievement of the
month was the photography of islands in the
Great Nicobar group. The flight was intended
to discover if it were possible to reach these
islands, but on arrival there was sufficient fuel
Temaining to take photographs before return-
ing. Short-range squadrons during May
obtained routine cover wherever possible and
were also instructed to bring back as full a
weather report as possible, which proved valu-
able in planning the next day’s sorties. Only
three of the twenty-three sorties flown on
survey photography were wholly successful. An
idea of the achievement in the field of survey
photography before the bad weather is shown
by the following figures, which represent the

B
