f~umb. 39173

1381

THIRD SUPPLEMENT TO

The London Gazette

OF TUESDAY, 13th MARCH, 1951
Publishes by Authority

Registered as a Newspaper

MONDAY, 19 MARCH, 1951

AIR OPERATIONS IN SOUTH EAST ASIA 16TH NOVEMBER, 1943 To
3isr MAY, 1944.

NOTE.—A set of maps for this despatch is on separate sale at 1s, Od. net. This set of

maps also covers the operations described in the other Air

despatches of the

and Army
Burma campaign from 16th November, 1943 to 12th September, 1945.

The following despatch was submitted to the
Secretary of State for Air on 23rd November,
1944, by AIR CHIEF MARSHAL SIR
R. E. C. PEIRSE, K.C.B., DS.O., AFL.,
Allied Air Commander-in-Chief, South East

sia.

PART ONE
INTRODUCTORY

1. As a result of the formation on 16th
November, 1943, of South East Asia Command,
I assumed operational control of all Air Forces
in the South East Asia theatre, with authority
to employ them in conformity with the policy
of the Supreme Allied Commander, Admiral
The Lord Louis Mountbatten, G.C.V.O., C.B.,
DS.O., AD.C. Thus I had at my disposal
what had constituted R.A.F. India Command,
.and those American units in this theatre which
comprised the 10th USAAF. It was my
task to ensure that these forces operated as a
coherent body and that the best use was made
of the potentialities of each.

2. In addition it was my continued responsi-
bility to develop India as a base for future
air operations, as a supply centre, and as a
training area for R.A-F, and LAF. personnel.
Such activities absorb a considerable propor-
tion of the energies of the Command, and con-
stitute a task of which the importance and
Tesults are not immediately apparent. I have
therefore devoted Part Four of this Despatch
to the progress that has been made in this
direction.

3. Responsibility for operations on the
North West Frontier and for the Indian Air
Force was relinquished to the formation which

replaced the Inspectorate-General of the LA.F.
and to which was bequeathed the name Air
Headquarters, India.

* * * * * *

4. To ensure the integrated operational con-
trol of Units in Bengal and Assam, a new
Headquarters was set up under Major-General
G. E. Stratemeyer, US.A.A.F., designated
Eastern Air Command and located initially at
Delhi. This formation, which had previously
existed under the title Headquarters,
US.A.A.F., India-Burma Sector, China-Burma-
India Theatre, had administered and controlled
the 10th U.S.A.A.F. and provided in addition
base facilities for the 14th U.S.A.A.F. The new
Headquarters consisted basically of the Opera-
tions Section of the old organisation with the
addition of an R.A. element. This Com-
mand, and all those comprising the 10th
which had formerly come under Bengal Com-
mand and all those comprising the 10th
US.A.AF. in the same area. These forces were
subdivided into a Tactical Air Force under Air
Marshal Sir John Baldwin, and a Strategic
Air Force under Brigadier General Howard C.
Davidson, U.S.A.AF. I was authorised to
effect such re-grouping of operational units that
1 considered necessary to achieve maximum
operational efficiency, and as a result R.AF.
and U.S,A.A.F. transport units were merged
on 15th December into one organisation which
was given the title of Troop Carrier Command.
This new formation was commanded by
Brigadier General D. Old, USAAF. Simi-
larly R.A. and American photographic
reconnaissance units were incorporated into
one command which assumed the title of
