SUPPLEMENT to THE LONDON GAZETTE, 19 APRIL, 1951

two engine test benches were found, the normal
capacity for engine repairs must have been
very low. No sign of any centralised produc-
tion line was apparent.

39%. Of characteristic orderliness in Japanese
storage equipment there was none. All kinds
of equipment were found mixed together in
each warehouse apparently without rhyme or
reason, and there appeared to be little attempt
to keep any detailed record of stock and issues.
It is surprising how any items were found when
required, or further commitments even calcu-
lated.

399. Arms discovered tallied with the list
provided by the Japanese, but there was noth-
ing to show that this list was, in fact, definite.

Judging’ by the aggressive attitude of the-

Annamese towards the French at this period,
it may well have been that considerable stocks
of Japanese arms had not been declared.

The occupation of Hong Kong.

400. On August 29th a strong naval force
under Rear Admiral C. H. J. Harcourt, C.B.,
CBE. (Flag in HM.S. SWIFTSURE)
arrived off Hong Kong and landed a force on
August 30th, being joined by Rear Admiral
Cc. S. Daniel, CB. CBE. DS.C. @lag in
H.M.S. ANSON). The formal surrender of
the Japanese at Hong Kong took place on
September 16th. An air headquarters was
established on September 12th.

401. One Spitfire squadron was conveyed in
an aircraft carrier and the remainder of the
air units, which included a Mosquito L.B.
squadron, another Spitfire squadron, a Sunder-
land squadron, and one Dakota squadron, were
flown in to Kaitak Airfield at Kowloon, on the
mainland, :

402. Air defence of Hong Kong, and the
provision of air support for any operations
which might be necessary by the ground forces
involving security of the base, were the
ptimary duties of the air forces as planned.
In addition, however, Hong Kong provided a
link in the chain of air communications for,
and reinforcement of the British and Dominion
Air Forces which would garrison Japan.

403. The “Shield” convoy, which was at
sea at the conclusion of the Japanese war and,
accordingly, was diverted while proceeding to
Okinawa in connection with the Pacific “ Tiger
Force” operation, arrived in Hong Kong on
September 4th with 3,400 officers and men of
various R.A.F. units. A large percentage of
“Shield” Force was composed of personnel
of No. 5,358 Airfield Construction Wing, whose
original task had been rendered redundant.

404. The variety of rehabilitation tasks
undertaken by R.A.F. personnel on the occupa-
tion of Hong Kong and Kowloon on the
mainland, and accomplished without any pre-
vious experience, showed that the Royal Air
Force, apart from its qualities as a fighting
service, could be extremely versatile in other
spheres. It was gratifying to observe at Hong
Kong how aircrew personnel, mainly fighter
pilots, could apply themselves to ground dutier
varying from prison supervision to billeting
and requisitioning, whereas those with greater
technical knowledge, such as R.AF. Airfield
Construction Personnel, were largely respon-
sible for the initiation and maintenance of the
public services ; power, light, transport, etc.

(68742)

2159

405. In the first few days of occupation,
some 18,000 Japanese forces, including mam
senior officers, were rounded up, disarmed,
and concentrated in Shamshui Po prison, pre-
fiously a concentration camp on the main-

id.

406. The first commandant of what, under
British occupation, became a Japanese con-
centration camp, was a R.AF. squadron
leader whose previous experience had been
limited to operational flying. He proved him-
self a competent prison governor during his
short term of office before handing over his
duties to an Army officer.

R.A.F. undertake many public services.

407. The total neglect of civic administra-
tion by the Japanese in Hong Kong and
Kowloon, except in so far as it affected them-
selves, was all too apparent. Transport did
not exist; electric power was unreliable and
the supply severely limited; public health
services had been totally ignored, and the
streets stank with accumulated rubbish and
filth. There was, too, large scale looting by
the Chinese who, until checked, literally
stripped every house they entered of all furni-
ture, fittings and every piece of wood includ-
ing floor boards and window and door frames.
Wood for fuel purposes, indeed, was at a
premium in Hong Kong due to the absence
of coal.

408. The problems of occupation which
faced our forces on arrival were so numerous
and varied that it was difficult to know where
to make a start. Yet, at this time, when
the R.AF. personnel were busily engaged in
establishing an occupation force, many im-
portant public services were undertaken with

ess.

409. To overcome the transport difficulties,
every motor car available was requisitioned.
This in itself involved considerable labour for
R.AF. personnel in rehabilitating and main-
taining decrepit and mechanically unsound
vehicles which had been left behind by the
Japanese. In particular, restoration of the
dock area to a standard capable of unload-
ing the freight ships of “Shield” convoy pre-
sented big difficulties. The wharves were
broken in many instances and covered with
debris and dilapidated equipment. Sunken
vessels in the bases were also hazards to
navigation. .

410. The power station at Kowloon was
manned by a R.AF. supervisory staff. While
the plant did not work to full capacity, prin-
cipally on account of fuel shortage, it was,
nevertheless, made to function and -supply all
the requirements of light and power in Kow-
loon and the docks area. This work included
the reconditioning of furnaces, boilers, and
the repair of certain turbine power units.

411. In their search for wood as fuel, an
R.A.F. reconnaissance party of ground per-
sonnel penetrated into the New Territories
which -vere still occupied by the Japanese.
Large stocks of wood were discovered at Taipo
and Fanling, twenty and fifteen miles respec-
tively. An incidental on this trip was that a
chit was given to the Chinese Communist Army
Troops which allowed the party to cross over
the border to collect a number of abandoned

c
