2166

not cheerful. As regards a British replacement
for the Dakotas, we could no fonger demand
the highest priority for labour in Britain, now
that the war had ended, thus making progress
automatically slow in production.

RAF. REGIMENT OPERATIONS.

A record of achievements in the South East
Asia Command.

489. In the various campaign stages of the
war in South East Asia I have been left
in no doubt whatsoever about the usefulness,
efficiency and fine example of that most junior
of all our forces—the R.A.F. Regiment.

490. The RAF. Regiment adequately
carried out the task of close defence of air-
fields in Burma and in other operational areas
in South-East Asia.

491. I have it on record from one of my
Group Commanders who moved with
Fourteenth Amy all the wa through Burma,
that he considered it probable that the Group
could not have occupied air strips as far for-
ward as they did—with consequently better
air support for the Army—had he not been
confident that the R.A.F, Regiment could have
maintained the necessary security.

492. In South East Asia the R.A.F. Regi-
ment proved itself a force capable of carrying
out more than the tasks which its originators
claimed the Regiment could accomplish. It
was not a force of men dressed up as guards
and picqueted around some airfield or supply
dump with guns propped in their hands. These
men were so trained in the art and strategy
of ground defence and of jungle warfare, that
they were able to undertake with success
counter measures against Japanese infiltration
parties who might set themselves up near the
perimeter of some airfield and constitute a
menace uatil hunted down and destroyed.

493. When the advance through Burma
began in January, 1945, there were ten Field
Squadrons, seven A.A. Squadrons and seven
Regiment Wing Headquarters working with
the Tactical Air Forces. On the capture of
Rangoon in May, 1945, these had been in-
creased to fourteen Field Squadrons, nine A.A.
Squadrons and eight Wing Headquarters.

494. For the D-Day operations plazined ‘for
the assault on Malaya, the Regiment was also
scheduled to play a prominent part. Five
Regimental Wings of nearly 2,500 officers and
men, made up of nine Field Squadrons and five
A.A. Squadrons were available. One A.A.
Squadron had been brought out of the Cocos
Islands, where its twenty millimetre Hispano
cannons had given protection to the heavy
bomber and transport airfield there.

Defence of Airfields and Mopping Up.

495. When it is considered that few
Japanese were ever taken prisoner in Burma,
electing to face death rather than capture,
and that the principal task of the R.AF. Regi-
ment was to protect our air strips rather than
to make enemy captives, the effort of the
Regiment between January and May, 1945, in
all forms of service was exceedingly high.
While operating at seven strips during that
period, the A.A. Squadrons succeeded in
destroying one enemy aircraft and registering
hits on three others out of a total of nine
enemy aircraft attacking ‘these particular

SUPPLEMENT. to tHe LONDON .GAZETTE; 19 APRIL, 1951

496. The most outstanding episode of the
R.AF. Regiment’s service in this theatre was
the assistance they gave in the defence of
Meiktila airfield. It was essential to comb the
airfield and its environs each morning for
snipers before permitting aircraft to land.
Every gully, fox-hole or other feasible hiding
place of a sniper had to be examined. The
patrols started just after daybreak and took
almost two hours to complete. It was thorough
and effective, but the only sure method of
clearing the area of the enemy, to ensure the
safety of our aircraft.

497. In mopping up isolated parties of
Japanese in Burmese villages at the time of
the advance on Rangoon, certain umits of
the R.A.F, Regiment gave considerable assist-
ance to Civil Affairs Officers and also helped
in the clearing and disposal of mortar bombs,
booby-traps, mines and anti-tank traps. Ex-
tensive searches, including patrols up rivers,
were also carried out by the Regiment in their
efforts to arrest wanted and known collabora-
tors and to enforce the surrendering of illegally
held arms and ammunition. The river patrols
on these occasions were necessary owing to
the difficulties of communication and the nature
of the country. During March and April, for
example, one Field Squadron covered an area
of 2,600 square miles, visited or “raided”
250 villages, arrested 100 Japanese collabora-
tors and recovered 26 rifles. Large quantities
of ammunition of British and Japanese make
were also recovered, together with clothing,
equipment, parachutes and rations.

The Occupation of Singapore.

498. In the protection of newly captured
airfields and the guarding of vital radar sites
once the assault on Malaya had begun, the
R.AF, Regiment would bave been indispen-
sable to the Air Force and could have been
relied upon to fulfil its task thoroughly and
well. Even in the peaceful occupation of
Singapore, units of the Regiment, within 24
hours, were maintaining the security of Kal-
lang, Changi, Seletar and Tengah airfields—
one of which had three hundred police in
peacetime.

499. Up country in Malaya, during the early
days of occupation by our forces, a squadron
of the R.AF, Regiment sent out a patrol
into one of the thickly wooded areas and suc-
ceeded in recovering 600 gallons of petrol
from a party of Malays and Chinese.

500. On September 10th, two days before
the official surrender ceremony at Singapore,
No. 1329 Wing R.A.F. Regiment, with four
Field Squadrons, arrived at Penang and took
over the entire garrison duties from the Royal
Marines. On the day following it was decided
that the Regiment should also occupy Port
Butterworth and Prai area, Province Wellesley,
as part of the Penang commitment.

501. If the RA.F. Regiment in South East
Asia. had done nothing more than provide
vital protection for our airfields, the record
of its achievements would still read with com-
mendable credit. That it was able to perform
further additional services and maintain a
smartness and discipline which called forth
praise from Army and Navy ‘alike, demon-
strates the value of the Regiment as an ad-
junct to the Royal Air Force. In my many
