2144

hours required to deliver them. In the event
of abortive trips producing a back log at
Toungoo, aircrews were briefed to proceed to
that area on supply dropping operations, after
which the aircraft landed at Toungoo or Magwe
and carried out second and possibly third trips
before returning to base.

221. During the flare up in ground opera-
tions in the third week in July, when ithe
break-through from the Pegu Yomas by the
trapped Japanese forces began, air supply to
the Allied ground forces engaging the Japanese
assumed considerable importance until the
battle had ended. Rainfall was widespread
over the whole area of operations, and diffi-
culties under which aircraft had to operate
were acute. With exceedingly bitter fighting
taking place, and thousands of Japanese troops
pressing forward in their anxiety to escape, the
state of the ground situation was ever fluid,
and made the accurate dropping of supplies no
easy task. Many of the dropping zones used,
indeed, were less than 100 yards from local
enemy forces and there were occasions when
a dropping zone was surrounded by Japanese
troops and some of the containers overshot the
mark and fell into enemy hands. It speaks well
for the aircrews trained in dropping supplies
that more containers did not fall into the hands
of the Japanese, whose desperate plight during
the previous two months was due to lack of
air supply and to the fact that the enemy were
cut off from their Headquarters and bases in
Southern Burma and Siam by our land forces.
Even in this last and major battle with the
Japanese in Burma it was significant that air
supply—of which the enemy had none-—was
one of the cardinal factors in assuring triumph
for the Allied ground forces and disaster for
the enemy. Air supply in Burma made
history which outdistanced in merit and
achievement the more publicised air supply
operations of the war in Europe such as that
of Ambhem, or the food dropping to the Dutch
in Holland. These, without doubt, were im-
portant and commendable efforts in themselves,
but they bore no comparison to the enormous
and sustained efforts of transport aircrews
who faced the hazards of monsoon weather.

End of the War Affects Air Supply Operations.

222. With the Japanese surrender in South
East Asia in August, air supply operations to
the Allied ground forces in Burma took on a
new aspect in keeping with the new situation.

. 223, This did not mean that the commitment
of the air supply squadrons would cease, or
indeed, that fighting in Burma was entirely
over. On the contrary, it was expected that in
certain respects air supply commitments would
increase. There could be no doubt, however,
that the nature and the location of loads which
would be carried, would greatly change.
Evacuation of prisoners-of-war and internees,
the “ fly-in ” of Allied ground forces to occupy
large and vast territories held by the Japanese,
were all commitments which faced the trans-
port squadrons in South East Asia on the cessa-
tion of hostilities. Materiel of war, on the other
hand—so important a cargo throughout the
campaign in Burma—ceased to have a first
priority. Movement of personnel, carriage of
rations and civilian supplies replaced the trans-
port of military supplies.

SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 19 APRIL, 1951

224. Operations of the transport squadrons
during August fell into two distinct categories.
The first half of the month, when Japan was
still at war, supply operations continued much
the same as on previous months. After 15th
August, when surrender was announced, the
situation became somewhat confused.

225. The supply tasks by aircraft during the
first half of August were confined principally to
the carrying of ammunition and petrol for the
two most active areas of fighting in Burma—
the Mawchi Road and the lower Sittang—
where the remnants of the Japanese forces who
had survived the July “Killing” were still
holding out. There were, of course, other
numerous and important supply tasks, the
biggest of which was the stocking of airfields
in Southern and Central Burma in preparation
for the sustained effort which would be required
once the assault on Malaya, under operation
“ Zipper ”, began.

226. One squadron during the first half of
August had the sole task of taking food supplies
to the civilian population of Northern Burma.
This was an important commitment owing to
the lack of other means of transport.

Operations to relieve Allied Prisoners of War.

227. With the Japanese surrender in the
second half of August, there came orders for
the move of six R.A.F. Transport squadrons
to the Rangoon area to transport stores, and
to evacuate Ps.O.W. from Siam, French Indo-
China, Malaya and the Netherlands East
Indies. As the result of these squadron moves,
and the military situation at the time, the

, number of normal transport operations fell

away very considerably. The majority of the
trips, indeed, were concerned with moves by
squadrons and the stocking up of the Rangoon
airfields with provisions for the liberated
territories and the P.O.W. Camps.

* 228. August 28th—the historic date on which
Operation “ Mastiff” was launched to bring
relief to the thousands of Allied Ps.O.W. in
the prison camps throughout the vast terri-
tories of South East Asia—saw the transport
squadrons, as well as other aircraft of the
Command, including those of the RAAF.
take part in what was described as “ one of
the greatest mercy missions of the war.”

229. Many of the flights undertaken in these
operations were equivalent to a Transatlantic:
flight, and yet 75 per cent. of the crews
succeeded in reaching their targets and
dropping their messages as well as parachuting.
medical supplies, Red Cross parcels and teams
of medical and signalling personnel provided
mainly by airborne formations. Later, many
thousands of Ps.O.W. and internees were
evacuated from these territories by air.

230. It is not difficult to visualise the plight.
in which our Allied Ps.O.W. would certainly
have found themselves after the official
Japanese surrender, had not all resources,
including Air Power, been used, and organised
quickly, to bring relief, comfort and sustenance
to these unfortunate men, many of them too
weak to stand on their own legs. Only Air
Power could have penetrated these vast terri-
tories throughout South East Asia with the
speed required to initiate that essential relief.
The pin-pointing of many Japanese P.O.W.
camps, in addition to the great distances flown.
