2136-

enemy. The Japanese casualties showed a
sharp ‘rise as a result of these sudden air
attacks. :

‘111. The air patrol on the Sittang River,
on the other hand, consisted of three standing
patrols daily—dawn, midday and dusk. The
duration of the patrols up and down the river
was so varied that the Japanese could never
be certain of escape. ;

112. During one such patrol in June, two
Hurricanes of 28 Squadron came upon 50
river craft of all types in the Suppanu Chaung
and, after damaging them by strafing, went on
to Letpan and there strafed several boats
drawn up on the bank of the river near some
villages. '

113. There could be no doubt that the vigi-
lance maintained by aircrews engaged on offen-
sive patrols over the Sittang River was a
contributory factor to holding up any river
crossing in strength, which the Japanese may
have contemplated during June.

Disaster overtakes the Japanese in Burma.

114. Disaster overtook the Japanese during
July, when their final bid to break through
the Allied net and escape from Burma ended
in a debacle.

115. It was one of the blackest periods for
the enemy throughout their ill-fated campaign.
More than 10,000 men were killed in the
month’s operations. Those who succeeded in
getting away and joining the main Japanese
forces at Moulmein, took with them a picture
of the punishing they had faced from the
British air forces, the warring guerillas, and
the newly-formed 12th Army under Lieutenant
General Sir Montague Stopford.

116. Operations by the air and ground forces
in this last major battle in Burma took on an
entirely new character from the mobility and
speed which had so characterised the pursuit
of the enemy down the central railway corri-
dor during April and May. Instead, the lull
period in June had given the squadrons and
ground forces a better opportunity to deploy
at strategic points in Southern Burma, so that
the enemy break-through from the Pegu Yomas,
when it ultimately took place, developed into
a wholesale killing. The monsoon forced
R.A-F. Squadrons to base themselves at air-
strips other than they would have preferred,
but, even so, the operations were maintained.

117. The squadrons of 221 Group, R.AF.,
accounted for at least 2,000 Japanese casualties.
Throughout the campaign it was always diffi-
cult to assess with accuracy the number of
actual casualties inflicted by the air forces and
our own artillery.

118. Four separate phases characterised the
July battle.

@ There was a sudden flare-up of enemy
activity on the Sittang Bend at the opening
of the month where the Japanese, firmly
established at (Mokpalin, succeeded in
making a bridgehead across the river and,
after some grim fighting, succeeded in hold-
ing on the right bank, an area of approxi-
mately one square mile of country, encom-
passing the villages of Nyaungkashe, Abya,
and Myitkye.

(6) Up country, on the Sittang, taking in
an area. between Shwegyin and Kyaukkye,

SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 19 APRIL, 1951

parties of Japanese troops, as they en-

deavoured to escape by crossing to the left

bank of the Sittang, coniinued to fall into
the hands of organised guerillas.

(c) Yet further to the north 19 Indian
Division and Patriot Burmese Forces in the
worst of monsoon weather, were struggling
along the Mawchi Road from Toungoo in
an effort to reach Mawchi, and cut the
main escape route of large Japanese forces
Tetreating southwards down the road from
Loikaw, and Kemapyu, on the Salween
River, and then south by valley tracks which
led to Papun and Kamamaung. From
Papun, one escape route continued south-
west to Bilin with easy access by road and
tail to Moulmein. The second escape route
from Papun went south-east to Kamamaung,
thence by ferry down the Salween to
Shwegun, and there joined a track leading
through Pa-An to Moulmein.

@) The final, and major phase, was the
large scale attempted break-through across
the railway corridor from the Pegu Yomas,
starting on July 2ist, by Japanese troops
whose strength had now been estimated to be
about 18,000, of which about 1,000
were left behind sick in the Yomas
and could not take part in the breakout
operations.

119. Squadrons which played such a con-
spicuous part in these operations were deployed
as follows :—

(a) ‘When the sudden flare up at the Sittang
Bend began, No. 906 Wing with Nos. 273
and 607 Squadrons ; one detachment of night
Beaufighters, and the H.Q. and one flight
of No. 28 Fighter Recce Squadron, were
based at Mingaladon, Rangoon, thus within
easy reach of this enemy force.

(6) Based at Kinmagon was No. 908
Wing with Nos. 47 and 110 Mosquito Squad-
rons, which were able, weather permitting,
to afford valuable support to the parties of
guerillas in their successful attacks on the
Japanese in the Sittang river area.

(c) No. 910 Wing was based at Meiktila
with four Thunderbolt squadrons, Nos. 34,
42, 79 and 113, ready for action at the first
sign of the break-through from the Pegu
Yomas.

(d) Assisting 19 Indian Infantry Division
on the Mawchi road, was 909 Wing at
Toungoo, with No. 155 Spitfire Squadron,
and later strengthened by No. 152 Spitfire
Squadron which moved down to Thedaw
for a short period, and, at other times, staged
through Toungoo.

120. When the break-through by the
Japanese from the Pegu Yomas started on
July 21st, the whole of the air support was
switched over to this area and, for eight or
nine days, the bewildered enemy was
strenuously harassed by the squadrons sup-
porting the 12th Army.

Battle of the Sittang Bend.

121. In an attempt to create a large scale
diversion of the Allied ground forces, the
Japanese, at the opening of July, launched an
Offensive at the Sittang from the bridgehead
which they..tenaciously held on the right bank
opposite Mokpalin.
