SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 19 APRIL, 1951

that the Japanese Commander of the Burma
Area Army had been ordered to hold Rangoon
to the end, but on his own initiative decided to
withdraw in the face of the Fourteenth Army’s
pressure.

15. It was realised after Rangoon’s capture
that to postpone the Puket operation later than
mid-June, 1945, would inevitably retard the pro-
gress of subsequent operations timed progres-

sively for the capture of Singapore by the end.

of the year. The Puket operation was there-
fore abandoned. With it, there vanished a step-
ping-stone to Singapore which the British Air
Forces could well have utilised to great advan-
tage.

Effect of Delay upon Future Strategy

16. The importance of accelerating the Allied
Malayan offensive had been emphasised. In
the first instance, it necessitated planning for
the occupation and development of Puket
approximately one month after the Monsoon
had set in. Any further delay than this in-
curred a steady deterioration in weather con-
ditions and a heavy swell on exposed beaches.
The cumulative effect of rain was also calcu-
lated to cause a steady increase in the saturation
of the ground and proportionately greater diffi-
culty in airfield and road construction,

17. It was estimated that the closing stages
of the campaign in Burma, involving at the
eleventh hour a mounting of the amphibious
operation “ Dracula” to make doubly certain
Rangoon’s capture, had imposed a minimum of
nine weeks delay in the initiation of the opera-
tion to capture the weakly held Puket. It fol-
lowed, therefore, if Malayan strategy was to be
implemented to meet the proposed time
schedule for the capture of Singapore that this
initial delay must be made good quickly.

18. To achieve this there were three courses
open for consideration, each of which involved
much planning :—

(1) To select an alternative objective
where airfield development was an easier
proposition in relation to weather conditions
and time available, or where airfields already
existed.

@) To retain the existing objective but on
a less ambitious scale of airfield develop-
ment and military occupation, thereby speed-
ing up development.

(3) To abandon any project for develop-
ment of a stepping-stone, and to embark
upon the second phase of our overall strategy
which envisaged a bridgehead on the
Malayan Peninsula as a prelude to the final
advance on Singapore.

19. Course 1, on examination, revealed that
areas more suitable for airfield development
did not fulfil the operational requirements,
while the occupation of existing airfields in
suitable areas was likely to require a major
military operation.

20. As regards Course 2, if some reduction in
the scale of effort was acceptable, particularly as
regards the requirements of heavy bombers,
then a substantial reduction in runway develop-
ment could be achieved. This, however,
would reduce the overall period of develop-

ment to the extent by which the base could -

be fully operational to provide the
air support and softening up operations on a
(68742)

2129

lighter scale in relation to the next phase of
Malayan operations as timed. Furthermore,
if reduction in base development were accom-
panied by a decrease in the scale of military
effort required to occupy the island, this would
result not only in saving time, but also in a
general economy in resources and shipping.
The Army, however, would not agree to any
reduction in strength of assault and garrison
forces.

21. Course 3, when considered, had the
great advantage of making up the total time
lost, which, for reasons which have already,
been stated, was of paramount importance.

22. It was obvious, however, that without
intermediate air bases, close support by land
based aircraft could not be provided either
as a prelude to or during the initial occupa-
tion of the bridgehead. .

23. For this purpose, complete reliance had
therefore to be placed upon air support and
air cover by carrier-borne aircraft until suit-
able airstrips could be prepared within the
bridgehead. Furthermore, the degree of heavy
bomber support would be severely limited by
distance and weather. Even on the most
optimistic assumption that one or more heavy
bomber airfields would be available in Burma
by September, air bombing involved a distance
to targets of 1,000 miles with a consequent
reduction in bomb load and intensity of effort.

24. It was obvious, therefore, that opera-
tions at such a range could not afford the re-
quired support for the initial occupation of the
bridgehead. The lack of an advanced air base
also introduced difficulties as regards the fly-in
of aircraft for the build-up, and a routine ser-
vice for aircraft replacement.

25. When the problem was examined, the
Joint Planning Staff recommended Course 3,
provided that carrier-borne air forces could be
assured.

26. Course 3 was therefore adopted, and the
operation which, in planning, became known
as “Zipper”, envisaged the occupation of a
bridgehead in the Port Dickson—Swettenham
area. The assault, it was intended, should be
carried out by two Divisions of No. 34 Indian .
Corps, with 15 Corps in the following-up réle.
The amphibious operation would be under-
taken by a naval task force.

27. It was planned that air cover and sup-
port would be provided initially by carrier-
borne air forces, presupposing that at least three
light fleet carriers would be available for the
operation in addition to the escort carriers
already in the Theatre. The R.A.F. Squadrons
of 224 Group, which had given outstanding
service in Burma, were to be flown into the
bridgehead as soon as strips were available.

28. As complementary to operation “ Zip-
per”, planning was also initiated for the
occupation of Singapore Island under planning
code word “ Mailfist ”.

29. The initial assault for “ Zipper” was
timed to take place in early September, 1945,
and subsequent exploitation southwards in
Malaya was so timed as to permit of the final
assault on Singapore by the end of December.

30. From the air point of view I consider
the “ Zipper” plan for the assault on Malaya
possessed one distinct disadvantage—its great

A2
