SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 19 APRIL, 1951

153. As the last few hundreds of exhausted
Japanese were making their escape to Moul-
mein with bitter recollections of the ordeal they
had passed through, Lieutenant-General Sir
Montague Stopford, G.O.C. 12th Army, when
recalling the severity of the weather, its flood-
ing, rains and cloud, showed his appreciation
of the R.A.F. in these words :—

“Grateful if you would accept and pass
on to all ranks under your command my
most grateful thanks for the admirable sup-
port given during break-out battle and my
congratulations on splendid results achieved.
Flying conditions must have been most diffi-
cult but on all sides I hear nothing but
praise of the keenness and determination of
pilots to get through. You have all played
a great part in the Twelfth Army’s first big
operation.” ef
154. Over and above the R.A. contribu-

tion, our victory was won by our superiority
over the Japanese in training, fighting ability
and weapons; the accurate intelligence which
was obtained before the battle began ; the fine
work of the guerillas, and above all the high
morale and fighting efficiency of the troops.

STRATEGIC AIR OPERATIONS.

A Well Sustained Offensive against Enemy
Supply and Communications.

155. With the capture of Rangoon and the
disbandment of the integrated Anglo-American
Strategic Air Force on June Ist, the R.A.
heavy bombers of 231 Group were left to carry
out the next phase of the battle against the
enemy’s communications leading to Singapore,
and on other important targets.

156. The partnership which had been forged
between heavy bomber units of No. 231 Group,
R.AF., and the 7th Bombardment Group,
US.A.AF. had, over a period, produced a
striking force so effective that it brought about
a serious disruption to Japanese strategic com-
munications in this Theatre, with a critical
decline in the quantity of supplies intended for
their ground forces in Burma. .

157. The departure of the 7th Bombardment
Group had one important significance. The
Group had operated twelve aircraft fitted with
“ Azon ” equipment, consisting of a radio trans-
mitter in the aircraft and a radio receiver on
the bomb which, once released, could be guided
in such a way that fline errors could tbe
eliminated. Throughout the series of “ bridge-
busting ” missions on the Burma-Siam railway,
which, on account of anti-aircraft defences
could not be attacked from low level by
Liberators, the Azon equipment was used with
great success.

158. The destruction of bridges in Burma
and Siam, notably on the Bangkok-Pegu rail-
way, which was one of the principal tasks of
the Strategic Air Force, was a vital factor in
crippling the enemy’s land communications.

159. In a six-month period between De-
cember 1944 and May 1945, there was photo-
graphic confirmation of bridge destruction as
shown hereunder :—

Destroyed Damaged
Rail eee 96 36
Road ae a ae wae 13
109 40

Total

2139

160. Feverish efforts made by the Japanese
engineers, who worked with great energy re-
pairing and rebuilding bridges, failed to keep
open many of the vital communications upon
which the Japanese in Souther Burma
depended.

Greater Distances Flown to Target Areas.

161. On the Allied occupation of Rangoon,
R.AF. Liberators carried the heavy bomber
offensive much further afield into the enemy-
occupied territories of South East Asia, in-
volving frequent flights of over 1,000 miles
radius from their Indian bases in Bengal. This
was inevitable, as the newly occupied airfields
in Southem Burma, after the capture of Ran-
goon, were not yet big enough to take heavy
bombers. The long distance flights undertaken
by these aircraft across the Bay of Bengal in
difficult monsoon. weather were most
hazardous. “

162. From Moulmein, at the mouth of the
Salween River, to Victoria Point, the southern-
most tip in Burma, is nearly 500 miles. This
coastal tip, known as the Tenasserim, together
with Japanese bases in the Andaman Islands,
came in for attention by the heavy bombers
after our entry into Rangoon. ‘ Nearly 1,000
tons of bombs were dropped by the R.ALF.
squadrons during May, which reflected the
determination of the crews to carry on their
heavy bombing work in the disruption of the
enemy’s communication system. Indeed, what
was to have been a V.E.-Day celebration in
May, was spent by crews of the squadrons
standing by for an attack on shipping in the
Andamans. This cultimated in a bombing raid
on May 17th against the most westerly Japanese
base in the Bay of Bengal—Port Blair. The
bombing force on this occasion concentrated
on important harbour installations, including
marine workshops at Phoenix Bay, while
buildings at Hope Town, the main coaling
point, were destroyed. A large orange red
explosion, with flames rising up to 1,500 feet,
was seen by the crews after they had hit their
target. The enemy had fortified the whole area
of Port Blair with shore batteries and A.A.
guns, which succeeded in shooting down one
of our aircraft.

163. But the main battle against the enemy’s
communications—notably those affecting Singa-
pore—was now on. The same air strategy
which had disrupted the Japanese supply line
between Bangkok and Rangoon was applied in
the succeeding months with equal effectiveness ©
to the line linking Bangkok with Singapore.

164. Communications on this mountainous
peninsula, embracing territory of three States—
Burma, Siam and Malaya—had, for the most
part, been seaborne, though, as the Japanese
advance in 1941 showed, Singapore still had
a backdoor by means of the rail route to the
north.

165. With the sea lanes in the Strait of
Malacca made more and more hazardous for
Japanese shipping through the effectiveness of
our mine-laying from the air and the vigilance
shown by R.N. submarines, the enemy was
forced to fall back steadily on the use of the
Bangkok-Singapore railway for the movement
of supplies. This line snaked for a thousand
miles up the narrow neck of land between the
Gulf of Siam and the Andaman Sea.
