2128

Asia which she had invaded during her orgy
of conquest some three years before, was now
inevitable.

4. A_ redeployment of manpower and
material resources from Europe for the war
against Japan was scheduled to begin, which
would thus quicken the tempo of operations.
But long before the collapse of Germany had
taken place in Europe, the plans for the re-
conquest of Malaya and Singapore had been
prepared. With the other Commanders-in-
Chief in this Theatre, I shared the conviction
that the second half of 1945 would bring the
reinforcements promised by London. :

5. On the entry into Rangoon on 3rd May,
1945, theatre strategy was directed to the
liberation of Singapore at the earliest possible
date with a view to opening up the sea-route
to Indo-China and the East Indies, and to
liberating enemy-occupied countries. There-
after, strategy subsequent to the re-occupation
of Singapore would depend upon the march
of events in the Western Pacific Theatre.

6. It had been the contention, hitherto, that
the capture of Singapore would involve at Jeast
two intermediate operations before the final
goal could be achieved. Firstly, it was con-
sidered that an initial operation would be
necessary to establish an advanced air and
naval base. Through this base, aircraft and
assault craft could be staged and operated in
support of the next operation for the seizure
and occupation of a bridgehead on the
Malayan Peninsula. Occupation and develop-
ment of this bridgehead on the mainland was
considered an essential prelude to the final
overland advance on Singapore itself.

7. Hastings Harbour was originally selected
as the initial objective, but this was postponed
to take place after the Monsoon. Further ex-
amination by the Joint Planning Staff at Head-
quarters, S.A-C.S.E.A., however, indicated that
a stepping-stone still further south than
Hastings Harbour was not only desirable in
relation to the time margin, but also a prac-
ticable proposition as regards the fly-in of
single-engined fighters and close support air-
craft. It was essential, however, from the
aspect of resources available, that such an
operation should be a limited commitment as
a military operation and also as regards the
shipping lift. | These limitations, therefore,
narrowed down the selection of this objective
to a lightly defended island. Puket Island
fulfilled this requirement. Its occupation was
therefore planned for June, 1945.

Puket Operation or “ Roger”.

8. The Puket operation—(“ Roger ”)—was
approved in ‘principle by the Chiefs of Staff
in February, 1945, but they reserved judgment
as to its timing in relation to the fall of
Rangoon. A plan for the operation was never-
theless prepared by the Joint Planning Staff
and Force Commanders’ Staffs were appointed.

’ 9. Force Planning began in Delhi on Febru-
ary 2nd, but it became apparent that the occupa-
tion of an island so close to the mainland
would involve a greater military commitment
than had been envisaged earlier. The Army
concept of this operation demanded one Divi-
sion for the assault and initial occupation of
the island, including a small bridgehead on the

SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 19 APRIL, 1951

mainland, and one follow-up Division to con-
solidate the position. The Japanese garrison
of this island was reported to be approximately
one battalion, but other land forces could have
been assembled on the mainland once the
attack was disclosed.

10. Owing to the distance from our own
mainland bases, air cover and support would
have to be given by carrier-borne aircraft
initially until the capture of the first airstrip,
when the Air Forces would accept full respon~-
sibility for all air operational requirements. I
suggested that the Army demands, both in man-
power and material, were excessive for so small
an operation (the same opinion being expressed
by the Supreme Allied Commander and the
Naval C. in C.). I felt that if such demands
were persisted in, it might mean that the opera-
tion (which would have given vital air bases
to support a major operation) would have to
be dropped. These fears were well-founded,
as the proposed operation was subsequently
abandoned, mainly for this reason.

11. Development of the air base at Puket
envisaged the completion of three runways to
all-weather standard, with an initial force of
three Single Engine Fighter Squadrons and an
ultimate build-up to:— a

3 S.E.F, Squadrons. ‘

1 Fighter /Recce Squadron.

3 Light Bomber Squadrons.

2 Heavy Bomber Squadrons.

Detachments of Air Sea Rescue and Photo-

_ graphic Reconnaissance Unit.

Staging facilities for air transport and other
types of air traffic.

12. In addition to this, the base would also
require to be capable of staging airborne opera-
tions in relation to future requirements of the
campaign in Malaya. The air base, too, would
require to be fully operational by D plus 100
days, while its development to full capacity
was so timed as to provide the necessary air
support and cover for the next stage of opera-
tions comprising re-occupation of the Ports
Swettenham and Dickson areas, and a bridge-
head for the final overland advance on Singa-
pore. The occupation of this bridgehead was
planned to take place some four months after
the initial occupation of Puket with a view to
the final assault for the capture of Singapore.

13. Events in Burma, however, had forced
a change of plan, which envisaged the neces-
sity to capture Rangoon from the sea before the
monsoon broke, and open it as a port to relieve
the other overworked supply routes.

14. In this connection, it can now be, put
on record that a R.A.F. Mosquito aircraft,
carrying Wing Commander Saunders, made a
Jow reconnaissance of Rangoon the day before
the British Armada disembarked. Finding the
city empty of Japanese, and Allied flags fiying
over P.O.W. camps, he landed at the nearest
airfield, hitchhiked into Rangoon and released
some of our P.O.W’s. Wing Commander
Saunders then borrowed a native boat and
rowed down the river to tell the British Com-
mander that Rangoon was unoccupied by the
enemy, and offered his services as guide to
the Expedition. This unusual incident revealed
that the enemy forces in Rangoon itself had
departed between the times of departure and
arrival of the sea convoy. It was later revealed
