2146

American Experience in Casualty Evacuation.

244. Since American aircraft operated as
part of the Allied Air Forces in the Theatre
until integration in the Command ceased on
ist June, 1945, it is not inappropriate to men-
tion something of the interesting experience of
American L.5. aircraft employed in Burma in
casualty evacuation and in other secondary im-
portant tasks associated with supply to the
ground forces.

245. A special research report on evacua-
tion of casualties from the forward areas in
Burma which was produced in July, 1945 by
Air/12G (Research) Headquarters, Allied
Land Forces, South East Asia, described the
work of two American squadrons operating
L.5. aircraft with Fourteenth Army in the
campaign.

The purpose of the report was:—

(@) To consider the best method of using
L.5. aircraft for casualty evacuation in the
light of the American experience.

(b) To estimate the number of aircraft re-

* quired to -evacuate the casualties from a

Corps in action with varying degrees of

battle activity.

246. Throughout the period considered in
the report—November, 1944 to April, 1945—
the squadrons worked with 4 Corps and 33
Corps from a rear strip close to the Casualty
Clearing Station. The squadrons of light air-
craft were allotted on the basis of one for each
Corps of three Divisions. The C.C.S. was sited
at the edge of. the strip. Forward strips were
made by the troops, and the location of the
Strips was signalled to the squadrons. A re-
connaissance plane would fly over the site in
the early morning and photograph the strip.
If it was considered satisfactory for landing
and take-off, the required number of aircraft
flew out immediately.

247. During the Meiktila-Rangoon ad-
vance of 4 Corps, the number of strips con-
structed was greater than that during a
corresponding period at any other time, yet
none of the strips was refused by the squadrons.
When the strips could be built more than 500
yards long, it was possible to evacuate two
Sitting cases in one sortie, but there were few
opportunities for this.

248. All the squadron commanders under-
stood their primary role to be casualty evacua-
tion, But important secondary tasks were also
performed. Except in the case of the fly-in of
important medical supplies, these secondary
tasks were never allowed to interfere with the
evacuation of casualties.

249. The secondary tasks undertaken
were: —

(a The emergency flying-in of medical
supplies, especially whole blood.

(b) Flying-in reinforcements, mail, food,
ammunition and items of personal kit. These
trips were always part of an evacuation
sortie,

ane Transporting V.I.P.s. within the Corps

“@ Spotting for artillery.
(e) Dropping and picking up messages.
(f) Reconnaissance flights.
250. The importance of the evacuation of
casualties relative to other duties was, indeed,

SUPPLEMENT to THs LONDON GAZETTE, 19 APRIL, 1951

interesting. The total trips by one squadron
over a given period of one month, when
activity was intense, was 12,017 of which 9,238
were casualty evacuation flights, or 77 per
cent. of the total, as against 2,779 secondary
missions.

251. In an analysis of the secondary tasks
undertaken by these aircraft, the flying-in of
reinforcements proved exceedingly valuable,
since these missions could be combined readily
with the collection of a casualty, while most
of the other missions could not. In various
ten-day periods, for example, the total number
of casualties evacuated was 7,705 as against
3,345 reinforcements flown in. The per-
centage of evacuated casualties which were
teplaced by reinforcements was therefore 43.

Evacuating Casualties from a Corps in Action.

252. For the peak period March, 1945, a
squadron of 32 American light aircraft
operated under 33 Corps.

253. During this period, all the cases re-
quired to be evacuated were taken out by air.
No cases were evacuated by road or rail. The
aircraft were based at Shwebo during the first
half of the month and flew as far as Ondaw,
35 miles away. In the second half of the
month, the aircraft were based at Ondaw and
flew as far as Wundwin, 65 miles away. The
numbers of ground forces evacuated and the
pours flown in three ten-day periods were as
follows : —

Number Hours
Date Evacuated Flown
1—11 March , 1,604
11—22 March 1,464 1,431
21—31 March 1,362 1,688
Total ... 4,619 4,723
Maximum distance between base and forward —
strip (miles) .. 65
Minimum distance between base and forward
strip (miles)... 35
Average per cent. aircraft in commission daily 96-7
Average number of aircraft in commission daily 30-6
Average number of hours flown per plane per 5-2
ayo we ry ree .
Average number of hours flown per plane per
Average number of cases evacuated per plane 5
Average number of hours flown j per day 187
Average number of cases evacuated per day 154

Maximum number of flying hours a Silo a aay 9

254. The above achievement by _ this
squadron was a record for the American
squadrons in the Group. The effort was be-
lieved to be near the maximum which any
squadron could reach in similar circumstances.

255. During the period some of the pilots
flew for nine hours a day for five consecutive
days, and made up seven sorties in one day
on several occasions. This intensification of
activity for short periods could not have been
achieved without the very high level of main-
tenance attained, nor could it have been ex-
ceeded without putting too great a strain on
the pilots or replacing some of the aircraft.
Three of the pilots had to be replaced before .
the end of the operation owing to exhaustion,
and 14 aircraft had to be replaced when the
squadron came out. The deterioration of the
engines, however, cannot be ascribed simply
to this operation, as the aircraft had had three
months of operations before operating with
