SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 19 APRIL, 1951

ashore on D-Day to set up control communi-
cations and radar screens, as an early occupa-
tion of Kelanang air strip in a serviceable
condition would allow Spitfires to be flown in
the following day and made ready for action.

373. The R.A.F. Wings made available for
the operation were Nos. 901 Wing, to be first
located at Kuala Lumpur; 902 Wing at
Kelanang ; 904 Wing at an air strip to be sited
and constructed ; 905 Wing at Port Swetten-
ham and 907 Wing at Batu Pahat or an
alternative.

374. A prominent ole in the “Zipper”
operation was also allocated to the R.AF.
Regiment. Five Wings of nearly 2,500 officers
and men, made up of nine Field Squadrons
and five Light Anti-Aircraft Squadrons were to
capture and hold the aerodromes and also to
protect radar sites. The majority of the men
had been on active service in India and

urma.

Other Operational Aspects of “ Zipper”.

375. Air operations in “ ipper ”, once our
position ashore had been consolidated and air-
fields established, would have followed closely
to plan thus:— ,

@ Eight squadrons of Thunderbolts
would have supported the drive on Singa-
pore.

(®) Fighter Reconnaissance cover would
have been provided by Spitfire F/R Mk.
XIV’s, and, as in Burma, they would have
flown protective patrols over the traffic lanes
of the supply dropping Dakotas.

(©) Two squadrons of Transport Com-
mand supply freighters were allocated to the
task of carrying supplies from the beach head
air strip at Port Swettenham to the forward
troops. A start would first be made with a
target of 150 tons per day from D plus 23.

@ With the possibility of an airborne
assault force deep behind enemy lines after
the third or fourth week of the operation,
six squadrons of Dakotas would have been
flown in from Rangoon and out again
immediately afterwards for this purpose.

(e) Mosquitos were to be employed as
light bombers, night fighters and photo-
graphic reconnaissance aircraft.

(f) Air evacuation of casualties was to
cave been the task of Sentinel and Auster air-
craft. As in Burma, they were to operate
from a main strip flying as required to 400
yard clearings in the flight zone to pick up
wounded and to carry them back to the
Dakotas. The more seriously wounded
were to have been ferried by Dakotas to
Rangoon.

(g) Three D.D.T. spraying Dakotas oper-
ating from Kelanang were to spray mosquito
infested zones over a wide area.

(h) To answer emergency calls from D
plus 4, three Sunderland aircraft were to be
available for air-sea rescue while three high-
speed launches were also to be deck-carried
to the beach head.

() Rocket firing Beaufighters were to be
employed from about D plus 43 in attacks
on shipping, enemy rolling stock, targets on
Singapore Island and also in assisting in the
bombardment plan for the crossing of the
Johore Strait for the final assault on Singa-

_ pore itself.

2157

Modified Operation “ Zipper” Goes Forward.

376. In the closing days of August, before
even the “ Zipper” convoys had left India for
Malaya, the emergency operation “ Tiderace ”
was ordered, since it was essential that air units
should fly into Penang and Singapore without
further delay. This brought No. 185 Wing,
controlling Dakotas, Spitfires and Mosquitos
from Burma to Penang, and No. 903 Wing
from Akyab to Singapore, together with Nos.
152 and 155 itfire Squadrons flying
Zayatkwin (Rangoon)—Penang—Singapore
(Tengah), and 110 Squadron from Hmawbi
(Burma)—Penang—Singapore (Seletar). No.
903 Wing elements reached Singapore on 6th
September, some three days before the first
“ Zipper ” elements arrived off the west coast
of Malaya on September 9th.

377. With “Tiderace ” operation completed,
and air, ground and sea forces occupying
Singapore, the modified “ Zipper” operation
went forward on September 9th with convoys
standing off the beaches at Ports Swettenham
and Dickson. The naval air support pro-
gramme, however, had been called off.

378. The air effort for the original
“ Zipper” was considerably reduced and of
the five R.A.F. Wings scheduled to take part
in the operation, the following wings did not
enter Malaya and were phased out :—

No. 901 Wing. No. 904 Wing. No. 907 Wing.

This left the Wing Order of Battle for
“ Zipper” as under :—

No. 902 Wing. No. 905 Wing.
Tengah. Kuala Lumpur.
No. 185 Wing. No. 903 Wing.
Penang. Kallang.

S.S. “Manela” Sunderland H.Q. Ship—
Seletar.

379. The following squadrons were also
phased out:—

Spitfires Squadrons No. 132
and 615

Thunderbolts Squadrons No. 530
and 261.

Dakotas Squadrons No. 96 and

Beaufighters Squadrons No. 22,
217 and 45.

Mosquitos

Squadrons No. 82. and
21.

leaving the undernoted squadrons of the
original plan :-—

Spitfires Squadrons No. 11, 17
and 681.
Thunderbolts Squadrons No. 131,
258, 81 and 60.
Mosquitos Squadrons No. 89,
684 and 84,
Austers... ... Squadron No. 656.
Sunderland Det. ... Squadron No. 205.

The “ Zipper” Landings which took place.

680. On D-Day, September 9th, the first of
the “Zipper” landings under the modified
plan took place, with ground forces and R.AF.
parties leaving the anchored convoys and going
peacefully ashore in the Port Swettenham and
Dickson areas.

381. This was the start of the large scale
landing in Malaya—and under very different
circumstances from what had been envisaged
when the operation was first planned.
