SUPPLEMENT to THE LONDON GAZETTE, 19 APRIL, 1951

183. The stranglehold on the Japanese sup-
ply and communications system was further
tightened on June 24th, when Liberators des-
troyed two important bridges at Kanchanaburi,
eighty miles west of Bangkok. The raid on
these bridges across the Meklong River at
Kanchanaburi was a disruption of serious con-
sequence on the Burma—Siam railway. The
ultimate result of this attack was that three
spans were demolished and one span displaced.

184. Strategic bombing by the air forces of
this Command drastically cut down the use of
the enemy’s railroads, compelling the transfer
-of more and more supplies to road and sea
transport, which inevitably slowed up the
enemy’s war supply machine.

185. When the ACS.E.A. Command
formed in December, 1943, our heavy bomber
effort was only 449 tons dropped by Libera-
tor aircraft. In 1944 the figure had risen to
3,846 tons, and by August, 1945, it had again
tisen to a total of 9,441 tons.

186. Behind these tonnages is evidence of
the contribution by the heavy bomber aircraft
of this Command to the overall strategy of the
Supreme Allied Commander, South East
Asia, in bringing about the disruption of

Japanese supply and road, rail and sea com-

munications.

AIR SUPPLY

A Testing Period for Squadrons
During Monsoon

187. Although the capture of Rangoon
brought an end to the more intensive Army-
Air co-operation in Burma, the day by day
air supply for ground troops concentrated in
Southern Burma, and still engaging large
isolated forces of the enemy, was still main-
tained.

188. There was no alternative. Air supply, it
was realised, would have to meet the Army’s
demands until seaborne supplies began to func-
tion, and road and rail communication inland
from Rangoon were re-established.

189. Much was being done to hurry forward
tehabilitation in Rangoon generally and to get
port facilities working, but this was no easy
task. Looting of property and bomb damage
to those essential services which are the main-
spring of a busy commercial port were exten-
sive. Entry of larger ships into the harbour
was also delayed until dredging of the river
channel was completed, while there was the
additional task of repairing docks, wharves, and
badly disrupted road and rail communications.
All these were vital factors which indirectly
affected supply to a vast Allied ground force
which had pushed its way into Rangoon.

\190. The period May to August, 1945—
covering the re-entry of the Allied forces into
Rangoon, and later the surrender of Japan—
cannot be termed spectacular in air supply
operations, when reckoned against such efforts
as persisted during the Allied advance down
through Burma earlier in the year, and the
supply tonnage record was broken in April,
1945, with 2,900 tons on one day. But it
was, nevertheless, an exacting period for squad-
rons and personnel alike, for the following
reasons :—

(a) The period of the monsoon had set
in, making flying exceedingly hazardous in

60 mountainous a country as Burma. ‘

2141

(5) With the disintegration of the British
and American Air Forces after Ist June,
1945, American Transports were withdrawn,
leaving R.A.F. squadrons of No. 232 Group
to continue air supply operations unaided.

(c) Supply demands made by H.Q. Allied
Land Forces were not immediately reduced
after entry into Rangoon. On the contrary,
the Army persisted in a continuance of air
supply on a scale which it was not always
practicable to meet in face of atrocious
weather and fewer available aircraft.

191. The departure of the American trans-
port squadrons towards the end of May, 1945,
resulted in a corresponding reduction in air
supply to the ground forces. With hostilities
in Burma virtually over, this was only to be
expected. What air supply did not anticipate
was the enormous concentration of Allied
ground forces which had pushed into Ran-
goon at the last minute to ensure its speedy
capture. These troops had still to be fed and
supplied, as had the Allied ground forces en-
gaging the remnants of the Japanese main
Army trapped in the Pegu Yomas of Southern
Burma as the result of the rapid Allied drive
to Rangoon.

192. Throughout the campaign in Burma it
had been the practice to pool the air resources
for the mutual benefit of the British and
American elements of Eastern Air Command.
The result had been a building up of a
balanced organisation known as Combat Cargo
Task Force, capable of operating at an ‘in-
tensive rate of air supply.

193. The operational achievement of Combat
Cargo Task Force, covering the period October,
1944 (the date of its inception) to the end of
May, 1945, when disintegration took place, is
best indicated by the following figures:—

Total hours flown ... 386,283
Supplies carried (short tons) 332,136
Number of persons carried 339,137
Number of casualties carried 94,243
Total tonnage carried, in-

cluding weight of persons

and casualties 379,707

Forecast for Air Lift after Rangoon.

194. From the examination of results
achieved during the advance through Burma,
and the lessons learned, it was possible, in
the middle of May, to agree that each transport
squadron’s effort as from Ist June, 1945 to
31st July, could be 125 hours per aircraft
for the month. This demanded an effort of
156 hours per aircraft on the squadron strength.

195. A better flow of reinforcement aircraft
was expected, which would thus greatly help
towards making the new transport effort pos-
sible, also a stepping-up and increase in effi-
ciency of maintenance organisation, with con-
sequent increased monthly output and quicker
turn-round of aircraft undergoing repair, was
taking place.

196. On the assumption that two R.AF.
squadrons were made available for airborne
training by 1st June, that internal airlines re-
quirements were met, and that USAAF.
transport squadrons were all out of the Theatre
from 10th June, it was calculated that the
