2140

166. Not all the stretch of railroad was
within range of the R.A.F. Liberators. With
persistence, however, they succeeded in getting
as far south from their bases in India as the
Bay of Bandon at the Isthmus of Kra, to
inflict heavy damage on the important railway
junction of Jumbhorn at the narrowest part
of the Isthmus.

Enemy's concern over Systematic Damage

167. I must express most sincere admiration
for the aircrews who flew these Liberators such
abnormally long distances, frequently through
atrocious monsoon weather, to bomb their
targets in Siam and Malaya.

168. Crews of Bomber Command in Europe

flew 1,200 mile round trips to Berlin when
attacking targets in the capital of the Reich, but
the R.A.F. Liberators in South East Asia flew
from their bases in India round trips well over
2,000 miles to bomb objectives at Bangkok,
and other targets on the Isthmus of Kra. This
is equal to a flight from London to Naples or
well to the east of Warsaw—flights, it should
be noted, which the R.A.F Liberators in my
Command carried out regularly against the
Japanese.
. 169. The concern of the enemy over the
systematic damage to, and destruction of, their
lines of communication in Siam and Malaya
was revealed in a document which came into
our hands entitled “ Protection of Communica-
tions”. This document called upon Japanese
Unit Commanders to overhaul their A.A.
defence methods as “enemy aircraft are
carrying out continuous and unceasing attacks
on our rear communications and planning to
cut our rear lines altogether. We must perfect
our counter-measures.”

170. The enemy’s increased vigilance, how-
ever, appeared to make no material difference
to the preservation of their rail bridges, dumps,
water towers, locomotives, rolling stock and
shipping.

171. On June 5th, seven Liberators attacked
tailyards at Surasdhani on the Bangkok-
Singapore line. Surasdhani was an important
supply post for the Japanese and, to reach it,
our bomber crews flew for 17 hours, mostly
across the Bay of Bengal, and through some
of the worst weather which the monsoon
during 1945 had produced. This flight of 2,400
miles was one of the longest undertaken, up
to that time, on a heavy bombing imission in

, this Theatre. The bombing was well concen-
trated, and the results were good. Subsequent
reconnaissance confirmed all claims made by
the crews.

Liberators sink 10,000-ton Japanese Tanker.

172. A shipping strike in Siamese waters on
June 15th, when a 10,000-ton Japanese tanker
was set on fire and left sinking by the stern,
was one of the most noteworthy operations of
its kind during the closing stages of the war
against Japan in South East Asia.

173. To effect this strike, aircraft had to
make a round trip of approximately 2,500
miles to the expected anchorage, the route
being almost entirely over the Bay of Bengal
and the Andaman Sea.

174. The tanker was the largest enemy vessel
reported in Siamese waters for many months,
and was believed to be one of the last of its

SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 19 APRIL, 1951

size remaining to the Japanese in the Southern
Area. It was sighted by a Sunderland aircraft
of 222 Group when it was apparently trying to
make a northbound run through the Gulf of
Siam and along the east coast of the Malay
Peninsula. The tanker had an escort.

175. The Air Forces at the disposal of 231
Group for this strike were four heavy bomber
squadrons—Nos. 99, 159, 355 and 356,
equipped with Liberator Mark V aircraft. A
detachment of six aircraft from No. 159
Squadron, based in India, moved down
temporarily to Akyab, on the Arakan, for the
operation. This enabled the aircraft of the
detachment to load up during the night and
to take off at 0900 hours on the day of the
strike. They were, therefore, the last squadron
in to attack.

176. Due to exceedingly bad weather
encountered by ail aircraft on the route to the
target, a number of the aircraft were forced to
abandon the operation and returned to base.
The master bomber and deputy master bomber
were, unfortunately, included in this number.
The remaining aircraft, which pressed on, came
upon their target in the early afternoon as ‘the
tanker was moving past Samui Island.
escort was some distance away.

.177. Three aircraft of 99 Squadron attacked
the tanker at low level but did not succeed in
securing hits. All three aircraft were damaged
by A.A. fire from the escort vessel and the
tanker itself. One aircraft had a fin shot off.
After delivering its attack, it eventually reached
Mingaladon Airfield, Rangoon, where it
crash-landed. The second aircraft, also
damaged, by A.A. fire, crash-landed at
Akyab.

178. The battle against the tanker was con-
tinued later with three aircraft of 356 Squadron
attacking at low level, and a direct hit pro-
duced fire and a series of explosions. The
tanker still fought back fiercely, and all three
aircraft were damaged by A.A. fire, one of
which crashed when landing at Salbani in Ben-
gal. The fight continued with the arrival of
three further aircraft from 159 Squadron which
pressed home the attack, claiming four and
possibly six hits. With smoke billowing to
7,000 feet, the tanker was left burning from
stem to stern and sinking. The tanker’s escort
succeeded in making its escape.

179. Subsequent reconnaissance showed that
the tanker was sunk, the funnel and mast were
seen showing above the sea.

1180. Loss of so vital a supply vessel as an
oil tanker of 10,000 tons, particularly at a time
when supply meant everything to the enemy
in South East Asia, added further to the em-
barrassment of the Japanese.

181. For this outstanding success I sent a
message of congratulation to Major-General
J. T. Durrant, S.A.A-F., who, on June 15th,
had assumed Command of 231 Group, vice
Air Commodore F. J. W. Mellersh, C.B.E.,
A.F.C., repatriated to the United Kingdom.

182. The attack on the Japanese tanker
ended a month of most successful shipping
strikes by the air forces of 231 Group during
June, for, on June Ist, Liberators had surprised
enemy vessels at Satahib in the Gulf of Siam,
when a 335-foot submarine depot ship—
“ Angthong ”—~was sunk.
