SUPPLEMENT to THE LONDON GAZETTE, 19 APRIL, 1951

(c) Squadrons were given their full ULE.
of aircraft instead of retaining a proportion
of them in the Maintenance organisation as
hitherto.

{d) Each Repair and Salvage Unit and Air
Stores Park worked for a wing and special-
ised in the types of aircraft operated by the
wing.

475. Re-organisation was necessary for yet
another important reason. The great distance
which, at that time, obtained between opera-
tional areas in Burma and bases in India,
precluded the return of short range aircraft to
Maintenance Units for major inspections and
engine changes. Thus, it became necessary to
transfer the responsibility for this maintenance
work to the squadrons and other flying units.
Owing to the different problems, including.
beaching facilities, involved in carrying out
major inspections on flying boats, this mainten-
ance continued to be centralised at Koggala in.
Ceylon.

476. Hitherto, all repair and salvage units
in the Command were controlled by Head-
quarters, Base Air Forces through Nos. 222,
226 and 230 Groups on a regional basis. In the
re-organisation no change in policy, however,
was effected in the case of units under 222
Group, Ceylon, and 226 Group, whose area
extended _ throughout India, but excluded
Bengal and Assam. The R. & S.U.s. on the
other hand, had, of necessity, to be fully mobile
and to move with the units they supported.

A7T. When the re-organisation was put into
effect the establishments of flying units were
increased by 25 per cent. in order to cover air-
craft undergoing major inspections at units.
This increase was effected by feeding in addi-.
tional aircraft from the R. & 8.U.s. as and when
the squadron or unit became due for a major
inspection.

478. The base at Rangoon carried heavy res-
ponsibilities—not only for the continuance of
operations during the mopping up period in
Burma, but in preparing its organisation to
meet the coming operations against Malaya.

479, A Forward Equipment Unit and a For-
ward Repair Unit were maintained in Ran-
goon to support the Air Forces in Southern
Burma and to act as backing, if necessary, for
the “Zipper” forces which would deploy
through Southern Burma bases. The pressure
on maintenance at this crucial period is illus-
trated by the amount of work tackled. During
the months from May to August, the Repair
and Salvage Units returned to service 830 air-
craft and dismantled a further 420 which had
been written off. The heaviest month, was
May, after the entry into Rangoon, when 300
aircraft were repaired—an indication of the
strenuous use to which they had been sub-
jected during the last stage of the lightning
advance to Rangoon.

480. It was thought that the Repair and
Salvage Unit in Rangoon would build up a
fairly extensive repair depot, but with the
capitulation of the Japanese in August this
was no longer necessary, and personnel were
switched to Singapore to re-occupy and build
up the original Repair Depot at Seletar on
Singapore Island.

(68742)

2165

Difficulties arising from Lend {Lease termin-
ation.

481, President Truman’s announcement of
the Surrender of Japan brought with it the de-
claration that Lend/Lease to Allied Govern-
ments was at an end except for assistance to
forces engaged against Japanese who had not
surrendered,

482. The repercussions in Air Command,
South East Asia were serious. There was a
world-wide shortage of Dakota spares. The
U.S.A.A.F., however, as a result of the termin-
ation of Lend/Lease had cancelled the pro-
duction of spares for their earlier Marks 1, II
and IIT and there were 200 Dakotas included in
this range within South East Asia Command.

483. To ascertain the position as it affected
Air Command, investigation revealed that, ex-
cluding Dakotas, Expeditors, Thunderbolts and
Cornells, there were some 1,600 American air-
craft and gliders in India and South East Asia
which would gradually become unserviceable
through Iack of spares.

484. The Command’s most urgent attention
at the beginning of September, therefore, was
directed with the utmost speed to securing
alternative arrangements for supply of neces-
sary spares. In some respects, but by no
means all, the situation was partially alleviated
by the arrangement reached at Washington that
the U.S.A.A.F. would meet, on a cash basis,
limited demands in respect of Liberator,
Dakota and Skymaster aircraft only. No stock
demands, however, were permitted. The literal
interpretation of this ruling was that a demand
could not be raised until an aircraft was
actually grounded or until repair was held up.
A period of from eight to ten weeks also must
elapse before the necessary parts could be
obtained from America.

485. What became quite certain was that
no demand whatsoever would be met in other
types of aircraft, which included the follow-
ing :—

Thunderbolt. Cornell.
Sentinel. Vengeance.
Argus. Catalina.
Expeditor. Harvard.

486. It was clear, therefore, that as stocks
for any particular item became exhausted, so
also would the repair of aircraft, their engines,
and associated equipment automatically cease.
Cannibalisation, or robbing another aircraft,
was of very limited value as the bulk of the
spares required were rendered necessary by
wear and tear or by climatic deterioration.

487. In a signal to the Air Member for
Supply and Organisation, I stated that if we
did not get the essential parts, I could foresee
us falling down badly on our agreed commit-
ments, and urged that dollars should be made
available for purchase of our essential require-
ments for replacement arising from wear and
tear.

488. But the difficulties in England over the
termination of Lend/Lease were greater than
it was at first realised. There were dollar
quotas to be considered, and in this connection
it was learned that demands on available
dollars were extremely heavy, especially for
foodstuffs. The situation in respect of air-
craft spares and replacements, therefore, was

E
