2154

Australian Air Force. It is interesting to note
that this was the first official intimation which
had been received by Headquarters, South
West Pacific Area regarding the representation
of Allied Air Forces in Japan.

335. With Japan’s surrender, H.Q. South
West Pacific Area were not unnaturally
anxious that we should accept full responsi-
bility, as soon as possible, within the new
Theatre boundaries originally discussed at a
meeting between Admiral Mountbatten and
General MacArthur, which had taken place at
Manila during July.

336. In the division of responsibility for
implementing the surrender terms, South East
Asia Command was allotted the following :—

{a) Andamans. Nicobars.
Burma. Thailand.
F.C. (South of Malaya.

16° N.). Java.
Sumatra. Lombok.
Bali.
Australia accepted responsibility for :—
(b) British New Borneo..
Guinea. Solomons.
Bismarck Islands Timor.
Flores. Ceram.
Soemba. Amboina.
Boeros. Tanimbar.
Kai Aroe.

Islands in the Arafura Sea.

337. This division, however, left a gap
comprising the Celebes, Halmahora Islands
and Dutch New Guinea, for which no forces
were available to implement the surrender
terms unless the Dutch did so—a commitment
which would obviously have introduced a ship-
ping problem to transfer the necessary forces
from Europe. The Australians, too, were
anxious to hand over Borneo to us as soon as
possible.

Te SURRENDER IN SOUTH East ASIA.
Ceremonies at Rangoon and Singapore.

338. In accordance with the orders of the
Supreme Allied Commander, South East Asia,
Japanese envoys, headed by Lieutenant General
Takazo Numata, Chief of Staff to Field Marshal
Count Terauchi, Japanese Expeditionary Force,
Southern Regions, arrived at Rangoon by air
on August 26th to be given their instructions
for the implementation of the local surrender
terms. Thus, after inflicting on the Japanese
one of the greatest defeats of the war in the
Far East, in a campaign which had lasted for
over three years and in which the enemy’s losses
amounted to 100,000 men, it was at Rangoon
that the Japanese Generals arrived to take their
orders from the Allied Forces in South East
Asia.

339. The meetings in Rangoon with the
Japanese plenipotentiaries were, in no sense,
negotiations. There was no question of dis-
cussion of terms. The Japanese were there to
accept Unconditional Surrender. It was in-
tended also that a binding act of surrender
should be signed at Rangoon and that the
official ceremony of surrender would be carried
out at Singapore after the Supreme Allied Com-
mander’s instructions had been completed at
the Rangoon meetings.

SUPPLEMENT To THe LONDON GAZETTE, 19 APRIL, 1951

340. The conditions insisted upon by the
Supreme Allied Commander, South East Asia,
included immediate relief to prisoners-of-war
and internees ; Allied aircraft to begin day and
night reconnaissance flights over South East
Asia; Allied vessels to begin mine-sweeping
operations in hitherto Japanese-controlled
waters, and also for Allied vessels to enter ports
in Malaya and elsewhere with full facilities
provided.

341. The meetings with the Japanese pleni-
potentiaries, which were resumed at Rangoon
in the opening days of September, brought to
dJight many positive facts concerning the plight
of the Japanese Army in Burma from the time
of the enemy’s disastrous retreat at Imphal in
June, 1944. It was apparent from one im-
portant statement read by Major General
Ichida, at Rangoon on September 11th, that
the Japanese in Burma had not reckoned with
two important and vital factors which upset
their calculations and placed their forces at
disastrous disadvantages : —

(a) Allied air supply, which permitted
ground forces in Burma to consolidate their
positions without being forced to retreat, and
thus rendered the enemy’s infiltration and
encircling tactics abortive. ,

{b) Allied air superiority, which so dis-
rupted Japanese supply lines, both in Burma
and further afield, that starvation and illness
overtook thousands of Japanese troops facing
Fourteenth Army, and also denied them the
essential supplies of fuel, equipment and
material with which to fight a superior
equipped, and better supplied, Allied Force.
342. With the disruption of the enemy’s lines

of communication, and the systematic attacks
on their rear supply bases, it was not surprising .
that Major General Ichida should declare :—

“From the time of the Imphal operation,
last year, our Army in Burma carried on
its operations continuously for a period of
a year with its main force, and during that
period the army hardly ever received any
reinforcements in its manpower—none since
December last year—the replenishment of
military stores also being very meagre.”
343. The situation of the Allied ground

forces, ranged against them, presented .a
happier picture. Thanks mainly to Allied air
superiority, and resulting air supply, they had
withstood the siege of Imphal, and, on the
siege being raised, had taken the offensive
down through Burma with the knowledge that
fuel, rations, ammunitions and miscellaneous
equipment would be air-dropped or air-landed
to them, throughout the advance, while casual-
ties inflicted by the enemy would be taken
care of and evacuated safely to base.

The Ceremony at Singapore.

344. With the Supreme Allied Commander,
and other Commanders-in-Chief, it afforded
considerable satisfaction to witness General
Itagaki sign, for his defeated compatriots,
Admiral Mountbatten’s terms for Unconditional
Surrender in the South East Asia Theatre a
Singapore, on 12th September, 1945. .

345. There was not displayed at that cere-
mony any deliberate’ outward show of pride
in Allied military achievement. It was moré,
J consider, an atmosphere of confident achieve-
ment which reflected the mood of the three
