SUPPLEMENT to THE LONDON GAZETTE, 19 APRIL, 1951

427. I think it is worthy of note that Opera-
tion “ Birdcage ” was carried out in very in-
different conditions. Even more important still
was the fact that an all round trip of many
of the sorties was equivalent to a trans-Atlantio
flight. Nevertheless, 75 per cent. of the crews
reached their targets, which included towns and:
camps as far east as Hanoi, Tourane and
Saigon.

Success of Leaflet Dropping.

428. The news of Japanese surrender con-
tained in the millions of leaflets dropped met
with great enthusiasm throughout the scattered
territories of South East Asia. They were
picked up on the streets of towns and read
eagerly by the civilian population. The mes-
sages also dropped to the Allied prisoners-of-
war stated, “ We want to get you back home
quickly, safe and sound”.

429. Many of the prisoners had been
Japanese forced labour for the building of the
notorious Bangkok-Moulmein railway—a slave
task which will take its place among the list
of incredible efforts carried out by captive men.

430. August, 1945, saw the greatest effort in
leaflet dropping attempted by aircraft of the
Command.

431. Prior to the surrender, and immediately
after, some 33,007,000 leaflets were dropped
over the enemy-occupied territories in South
East Asia. This form of psychological warfare
had been stepped up very considerably after
the defeat of the Japanese in Burma, and in
July the total dropped by aircraft of the Com-
mand reached 22,000,000.

432. One particular form of leaflet, dropped
over the trapped Japanese forces in the Pegu
Yomas of Southern Burma during July, not
only called upon the enemy to surrender after
telling them of the hopeless position of their
homeland, but, on the reverse side offered
them a safe conduct through the Allied lines
with the added assurance that they would be
given food, medical attention and honourable
treatment.

Launching of Operation “ Mastiff”.

433. The saturating of towns and prison
camps with leaflets announcing the Japanese
surrender was, in itself, a laudable effort, but
the main task which awaited the Air Forces
was unquestionably that of Operation
“(Mastiff in bringing practical relief and
comfort to those who needed them most.

434. Hundreds of these prisoners were
emaciated, gaunt and pitiful beings—some, in-
deed, were too weak to stand upon their
legs. The majority of prisoners were deficient
of proper clothing. There were instances, too,
where some were completely naked.

435. The need of medical supplies was per-
haps the greatest, for the Japanese had shown
little ability or willingness to appreciate the
needs of prisoners-of-war in many cases. The
immediate requirements in drugs, therefore,
could only be taken to sufferers by air, and,
as a large percentage of prisoners and internees,
particularly in Singapore, were affected by
malaria, it was estimated that 1.250,000 tablets
of Atabrine, or substitute, were essential for
delivery each week.

(68742) .

2161

436. The “Mastiff” operation in the early
stages was carried out by ten Liberator squad-
rons (including one R.A.A.F. squadron) and
one Dakota squadron. Three Liberator squad-
rons operated from bases in Bengal—Jessore,
Salbani and Digri—covering targets chiefly in
Siam and French Indo-China. From bases in
Ceylon another three Liberator squadrons
operated over Malaya and Sumatra, while areas
in Malaya and Java were supplied by three

‘ Liberator squadrons based in the Cocos

Islands, though these were chiefly employed
on targets in Sumatra.

437. The Dakota squadron operated from
Rangoon over Siam and the Tenasserim Coastal
Area of Southern Burma. The tasks under-
taken by this Dakota squadron must nof be
confused with the all-out effort made by five
Dakota squadrons of No. 232 Group, R.AF.,
based on Rangoon, which were employed on
the air-lift to Bangkok, where the Don Muang
Airfield was quickly in use. The operations
of these Dakota squadrons in the air landing
of supplies and in the evacuation of prisoners-
of-war was one of the outstanding features of
the air operations associated with “ Mastiff ”.

438. From Ist to Sth September, approxi-
mately 200 Dakota sorties were flown from
Rangoon, and some 400 tons of stores were
dropped or landed. The same aircraft carried
back 4,000 prisoners-of-war and internees. On
the following week the Dakotas carried out
a further 360 sorties, and dropped or landed
600 tons of stores. On their returm trips they
carried back some 3,700 prisoners-of-war. It
was a tribute to the enthusiasm shown by the
Dakota aircrews at this time that 12th Army,
by September 10th, was able to report that
approximately 9,000 prisoners-of-war had been
carried back to Rangoon from Bangkok. Early
in the month, practically all the U.S. prisoners-
of-war had been evacuated from the Bangkok
area, the figure being approximately 162. This
evacuation was carried out chiefly by U.S.
airlift, which was also responsible for bringing
out a number of British and Allied sick.

Use of Thunderbolts and R.A.A.F. Liberators.

439. Though not actually engaged upon
Operation “ Mastiff”, a number of Thunderbolt
aircraft flew from their bases in Burma and
assisted in the problem of locating camps and
determining their circumstances. Many of
these Thunderbolt sorties were rendered abor-
tive by weather, but other sorties resulted in
the bringing back of valuable information. It
was noted, for example, that several of the
prison camps on the Burma-Siam railway, in
the area stretching N.W. from Kanchanaburi,
were deserted and empty, while prisoners-of-
war in other scattered camps greeted the
appearance of the Thunderbolts with under-
standable enthusiasm expressed by frantic
cheering and waving.

440. The inclusion of a series of sorties by
Liberators of the R.A.A.F. which took’ off
from bases in North Western Australia to drop
supplies over Magelang Airfield, in Java, also
greatly assisted in the success of operations in
the opening weeks. These aircraft landed in
the Cocos Islands, loaded up with fresh sup-
plies, and repeated the drop on Java en route
back to Australia. The R.A.A.F. Liberators
completed 21 sorties, all of which were success-
ful. Other sorties of a similar nature were

D
