2156

at an early date should the enemy agree to
accept the terms of the Potsdam declaration
of July 26th.

359. The wisdom of this planning made itself
apparent early in August when the first atomic
bomb was dropped on the Japanese homeland
and Russia entered the war.

360. It was the possibility of Japanese
treachery, however, which decided the course
that planning would take, and the initial occu-
* pation of Singapore, known as Operation
“Tiderace ’ was, therefore, mounted from
Tesources other than those earmarked for
Operation “Zipper”. In this way, it was
possible to counter any Japanese opposition to
“Tiderace ” which may have taken place, by
continuing to mount the strong fighting
“ Zipper ” operation as originally planned.

361. Although the first objective in the re-
occupation plan was Singapore, a necessary step
in order to establish an advanced air and naval
base to clear the Straits of Malacca for ship-
Ping, it became clear that Bangkok in Siam,
and Saigon in French Indo-China, would also
have to be occupied soon after the Japanese
surrender.

362. Operations known as “ Sibber ”, which
involved the occupation of the Bangkok area,
and “ Masterdom ”, involving the re-entry into
French Indo-China to gain control over the
forces of Field Marshal Count Terauchi, whose
Southern Army Headquarters were at Saigon,
had therefore tc be worked out in detail. More-
over, it had been indicated by the British Chiefs
of Staff that the former British port of Hong
Kong must also be occupied at an early date.

363. To meet these exigencies, therefore, it
was found necessary to modify to some extent
the air effort for Operation “ Tiderace ” so that
the Dakota Squadrons, based in Rangoon, could
be utilised for essential trooping and air lift
during the occupation of Bangkok and subse-
quently of Saigon. This was exceedingly im-
portant, since a long voyage with troops from
existing Allied bases io Siam and French Indo-
China would almost certainly have prohibited
the speedy occupation of these territories had
not the ground forces been lifted by air.

364. That 14,000 Army and Air Force per-
sonnel for the garrison at Bangkok and Saigon
were carried in by our Air Forces without loss
after the Japanese surrender, was evidence of
the additional role which the Air Forces of my
Command were called upon to play on the
cessation of hostilities, at a time when it was
imperative to establish ground troops at key
points within the scattered enemy-cccupied
territories in the quickest possible time.

Original “ Zipper” Plan Forestalled.

365. The Surrender by Japan cut right across
the ambitious air plan for Operation “ Zipper ”
which had been so carefully conceived to sup-
port the landings by ground troops on the
Southern region of the Malay Peninsula.

366. Landings on the beaches at Ports
Swettenham and Dickson on D-Day, September
9th, were to have been made under air cover
provided by carrier-borne aircraft of the Royal
Navy, whose task would have included attacks
on the enemy’s lines of communication and
troop concentrations until the fly-in of R.A.F.
fighters was accomplished. Two aircraft

SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 19 APRIL, 1951

carriers, H.M.S. SMITER and H.M.S.

TRUMPETER, carrying short-range Spitfires

and Sentinels and Austers for casualty evacua-

tion, were to carry these aircraft to a point off

shore for pilots to fly them from off the carriers

and land them on the newly-occupied aero-
mes.

367. The planned effort of the naval carrier-
borne fighters was 190 sorties a day from the
moment of their arrival in the areas of the
bridgeheads for about a week. This would
be further augmented, within six days, by an
additional 72 sorties a day from the first land-
based squadrons of R.A.F. Spitfires, arid six
sorties per night from the night fighter
Mosquitos. From the outset, therefore, air
superiority was assured. The enemy was not
expected to produce any serious air threat which
could not be dealt with adequately by our
fighters.

368. As more than a thousand miles
separated the existing R.A.F. bases in Rangoon
and the Cocos Islands from the landing
beaches, and aimost 1,50C mites in respect of
other R.A.F. bases in Ceylon and Ramree
Island, it was impossible for I'ght bomber,
fighter and fighter bomber squadrans to operate
in immediate support of the bridgehead ground
forces until the position ashore was consoli-
dated, an airfield captured, repairs effected and
runways made serviceable.

369. Basing its time-table on the speed of the
Army’s advance and the rapidity by which con-
structional engineers could repair damaged run-
ways and taxi-tracks, it was estimated that
strips could be brought into operation at the
rate of approximately one per week. Once
the newly-occupied airfields had been estab-
lished, the long-range Thunderbolts, Mosquitos
and Dakotas, flying a thousand miles from
Rangoon, would then make the flight south to
Malaya, being guided on the way by three
navigational aid ships at specified pusitions off
the Tenasserim Coast and Malayan Peninsula.

370. The first strip —Kelanang—was calcu-
lated to be operational by D plus 6; Port
Swettenham by D plus 12 and Kuala Lumpur
by D plus 20. It was possible that a fourth
strip might be established at Batu Pahat, or
Malacca, in order to accommodate a light Mos-
quito bomber and rocket-firing Beaufighter air-
craft by D plus 40.

371. The value of the Cocos Islands prior to
and during Operation “ Zipper” would have
been considerable. The Strategic and G.R.
squadrons were to have taken part in large-scale
pre-D-Day operations directed against radar
installations covering the approaches to the
assault area, and also to cutting the Bangkok-
Singapore railway north of Kuala Lumpur.
Other tasks included the neutralising of the
Japanese Air Force, estimated at a little more
than 170 aircraft in Malaya and Sumatra, also
attacking enemy shipping employed in carrying
supplies or reinforcements to Malaya to oppose
our landing. The aerodromes at Kelanang, Port
Swettenham and Kuala Lumpur were not to be
bombed, since they were the first objectives on
establishing the bridgehead.

372. Five R.A.F. Wings were detailed to
operate in the tactical forces contained within
Air Vice Marshal Bandon’s 224 Group, whose
advanced Headquarters were to be established
