SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 19 APRIL, 1951

however, retarded owing to the land com-
munication difficulties within the area, and I
had to give orders that No. 96 (Dakota)
Squadron should be given the task of flying-in
bithess from Bengal to Mingaladon. The task
was completed to scheduled time.

43. I regret that the Air Forces should have
had to call upon the Army for airfield construc-
tion in Burma owing to the absence of R.AF.
airfield construction units and Air Ministry
Works Supervisory personnel in this Theatre.
There is no doubt that the American system
of providing aviation engineer battalions in
Burma proved better and more satisfactory.
It might also be noted that some fifteen
thousand R.A.F. constructional personnel were
allocated by Air Ministry to the Tiger Force
Operation in the Pacific, although South East
Asia Command was deplorably short of
engineers, and it must have been evident that
this new Air Force was most unlikely to
operate before the defeat of the Japanese.

Hastening Construction of Burma Airfields.
44, Early in June, my Air Marshal Adminis-
tration visited Rangoon to obtain first-hand
details of the problems being encountered, and
to hasten construction of airfields as much as
possible. On my own visit to Rangoon on
June 15th, I was assured by Major General
Administration, Headquarters, A.L.F.S.E.A.,
that all points brought up by my Air Officer
Administration were receiving attention.

45. The enormous increase in the Air Forces’
radius of action which the new airfields under
construction would afford was foreshadowed in
June, when R.A.F. heavy bombers, operating
from bases in Bengal, attacked and sank a
10,000-ton Japanese tanker in the Gulf of Siam.
One aircraft damaged by flak was forced to
land at Mingaladon Airfield, Rangoon, which
was not yet completed, and over-ran the avail-
able length of the runway, killing the crew.

46. The continued pressure by Air Command
on the Army for more speedy construction
brought better results, and it was a little more
heartening, on June 28th, to be given dates
estimated for the various stages in the com-
pletion of the following airfields in the Rangoon
area :—

Zayatkwin—i,750 yards. A/W runway
by July 20th.

Zayatkwin—2,000 yards. A/W runway
by July 31st.

Mingaladon—1,750 yards. A/W runway
by July 31st.

Mingaladon—2,000 yards. A/W runway
by August 15th.

47. By October Ist, it was estimated that
Mingaladon Airfield would be capable of
accommodating a total of 150 aircraft for
operational purposes. The airfield at Zayat-
kwin was expected to handle 130 Thunderbolts
or Mosquitos, and would be staging through
the Squadrons for “ Zipper” by Ist October.
Pegu was also being developed as quickly as
possible as a heavy bomber airfield.

48. While it was expected that squadrons
would be able to move into the new airfields
by the end of July, No. 224 Group, which had
been linked with Lieutenant-General Sir Philip
Christison’s 15 Corps in some of the fiercest
fighting in Burma, was preparing to leave the

2131

Arakan with its units and to proceed to India
for training and re-equipment in preparation
for the mounting of “ Zipper ”.

49. The move of 224 Group squadrons was
greatly delayed and handicapped on account of.
the shortage of shipping and the inadequate
land transport facilities in Burma. The fact
that Army units were also leaving Burma at
the same time did not make the position easier
for the movement of Air Force personnel and
their equipment. June, indeed, ended with
the move of 224 Group far from complete, and
it soon became apparent that units would not
succeed in clearing from the Arakan before the
third week in July.

Withdrawal of US.A.A.F. from Air Com-
mand, South East Asia

50. On June Ist, 1945, because of our air
dominance, the narrowing front, and the fact
that the tactical situation after Rangoon per-
mitted no offensive action by the
US.A.A.F., the British and American Air
Forces reached the parting of the ways in South
East Asia Command. The American commit-
ment in Burma had ended with the capture
of Northern Burma and removal of the enemy
threat to the supply line to China.

51. Each Air Force was now to prosecute
the air war against the Japanese in neighbour-
ing Theatres. For the Royal Air Force, the
offensive now headed down the Malay Penin-
sula to Singapore. For the U.S.A.AF., how-
ever, the route lay across the Himalayas to
China, since the sphere of the American Com-
mand was designated the China-Burma-India
Theatre. Yet another reason for the withdrawal
of the 10th U.S.A.A.F. was the critical air
supply situation in the Northern Combat Area
Command, due mainly to the high rate of effort
at which the 10th Air Force Transport Squad-
rons had been operating and which was now
beginning to tell on personnel and aircraft
alike. At the same time, the American squad-
rons required refitting and rest before their
impending move to China.

52. The withdrawal of American Squadrons
for service in another Theatre did not affect
the strategic situation in South East Asia Com-
mand. The only aircraft which could have
been retained with advantage were (a) the
transports which were being phased out gradu-
ally to bridge the gap until the arrival of our
Stage 2 aircraft, and whose withdrawal could
not be further delayed on account of the urgent
need in China, and (5) the photographic Libera-
tors of the 24th Combat Mapping Squadron.

53. The period of integration between British
and American Forces in South East Asia had
shown a very real spirit of close co-operation
—a fact which I emphasised in a special Order
of the Day published on June Ist, announcing
the withdrawal from Air Command, South East
Asia, of the United States Army Air Forces
under Major General George E. Stratemeyer,
Eastern Air Command, Calcutta.

54. In my’ Order of the Day, which I sent
to General Stratemeyer, I revealed how air
power had followed the basic principle in
modern warfare—that the air battle had first
been won before embarking on the land battle.
Once the air battle was decided, air power
was then able to provide the ground forcee
with direct forms of assistance.
