2152

310. It became apparent, after the fall of
Rangoon, that Photographic Reconnaissance
in the Command would have to be endowed
with a mobility which would allow it to
move forward with the tide of battle. Accord-
ingly, No. 347 P.R. Wing, which was formed
in April, became effective as a formation in
May, 1945. The new Wing Headquarters
absorbed all of the R.A-F. element of the
Photographic Reconnaissance Force and certain
sections of the Station Headquarters at Alipore
and Bally (India), where the two R.AF.
Squadrons of Spitfires and Mosquitos were

ased.

311. In May, No. 684 Squadron continued
to be based at Alipore, but No. 681 Squadron
moved to Mingaladon, Rangoon and flew most
of their sorties in support of the Twelfth
Army’s mopping up operations along the
Mawchi Road, the Sittang Bend and the road
and river communications between Pegu and
Moulmein.

312. On 9th June, 1945, the Wing passed to
the Command of Group Captain C. E. St. J.
Beamish, D.F.C. .

Working against the Monsoon in Operational
Areas.

313. Bad weather was the enemy which
photographic reconnaissance had to combat
almost continuously. Only by dint of sheer
perseverance were many of the most important
covers accomplished.

314, With the arrival of the Monsoon in

May over the operational areas in Southern
Burma and Siam, coverage from a _photo-
graphic point of view became extremely diffi-
cult and flying more hazardous.
. 315. The inter-tropical front appeared at the
Isthmus of Kra and moved as far north as
Mergui, but generally it kept more to the
south, By the end of May, weather
deteriorated considerably and the Monsoon
entered into its own for the season.

316. While Spitfires, based in Southern
Burma, were able to take advantage of local
weather conditions for short P.R. sorties in
support of the Army, the task was more
difficult, long range Mosquitos undertaking
many flights of more than 2,000 miles for each
sortie. More than one aircraft on occasions
returned to base with torn fabric and other
evidence of severe climatic conditions.

317. In August, with the weeks drawing
near for the assault on Malaya, No. 2 Mosquito
Detachment of 684 Squadron (based on the
Cocos Islands), succeeded in flying 282
operational hours with only four crews. Some
of the beach targets necessary for operation
“Zipper” were exceedingly exacting, since
photography had to be done at low tide in
order to secure a full picture of the state
and condition of beaches in preparation for
the landings.

318. Intimation of Japan’s surrender was the
signal for P.R. to work at greater pressure
than ever. The “ Zipper” programme, which
was all but complete, was cancelled, and a new
programme substituted entailing cover, three
times a fortnight, by P.R. aircraft of all im-
portant targets ranging from Penang: Island to
Sourabaja in Java. It is worth noting that
PR. aircraft, during this period of uncertainty
among Japanese units regarding their country’s

SUPPLEMENT to THE LONDON GAZETTE, 19 APRIL, 1951

surrender, met with more opposition than at
any other time. At Palembang, pilots re-
ported that enemy A.A. fire was intense.

319. Probably the most outstanding P.R.
sortie from a general and humane interest at
this time was that undertaken by a pilot of
681 Squadron (Spitfires) when covering
prisoner-of-war camps in the Kanchana Buri
area of Siam, ten days after the declaration
of Japan’s surrender. Prisoners at one of the
camps were crowded together and swarming
over the watch towers, waving and cheering
to the pilot of the aircraft. Signs were also
laid on the ground, including a giant Union
Jack to indicate to the pilot that the prisoners
also knew of events which had caused excite-
ment in the world outside.

Parr III.
THE SURRENDER OF JAPAN.

THeaTRe BOUNDARIES AND DEPLOYMENT OF
Am Forces Decmep aT Manila
CONFERENCE.

320. August, 1945 saw the war against
Japan move with over-whelming speed towards
its culmination.

321. Throughout the war, research in
Britain, America and Germany had pursued
the possibility of harnessing to war the poten-
tialities of atomic energy, and the first atomic
bombs were dropped with devastating effect on
metropolitan Japan at Hiroshima and Nagasaki
on 5th and 9th August, 1945, respectively.
Adding further to the plight of Japan was the
declaration of war by Russia on &th August,
followed by Soviet Forces crossing the Man-
churian and Korean borders.

322. From these momentous events, and
faced with certain Allied invasion of the home-
land, for which air power had paved the way,
Japan could see no escape. The end came in
the form of surrender, which was broadcast
from Tokio on 10th August, and the acceptance
of the Allied terms on 14th August.

323. As the result of the Japanese intimation
that they were prepared to discuss and to
receive surrender terms, the Supreme Allied
Commander, South East Asia, directed that a
Mission representing himself and his three
Commanders-in-Chief should be despatched to
Manila in the Philippines. The primary
object of this Mission was to discuss the terms
of surrender with General MacArthur and his
staff, with a view to co-ordinating measures to
be adopted to implement the terms of surrender
‘both in the South West Pacific area and in
South East Asia.

324. As my representative on this Mission,
I selected Air Commodore W. A. D. Brook,
C.B.E., Deputy Senior Air Staff Officer. Other

‘members of the Mission which left Kandy by

York on 16th August, refuelling at Calcutta
en route, and continuing the flight by night
over enemy occupied territory, were: —
Major-General Penney, S.A.C.’s represen-
tative. Head of the Mission, and also repre-
senting C.-in-C., A.LF.S.E.A.

Vice-Admiral C. Moody, representing
C.-in-C., ELF.

Colonel! Mitford-Slade, _ representing
I.P.S.,SACS.E.A.

Colonel Bull, representing J.P.L.C..
S.AC.S.E.A.
