2138.

138. Whilst these exploits revealed the mag-
nificent work of aircrews, they illustrated at
the same time the confidence and daring of the
British-led irregular, for whom the pilots of
221 Group squadrons felt most strongly that
it was a case of “Hats right off” to the
guerillas.

139. “From Letpangon we were attacked
by two hundred Japs at 23.30 hours. We only
killed fifteen of them, but we kept them there
for you to attack next day when you put in
two good strikes. They cleared out after dark,
and went on to Yindaikaein where you were
able to attack them again,” said Captain
Waller.

140. The combined attacks on the Japanese
aircraft and guerilla parties constituted a war
of attrition on the enemy. They could never
be sure of safety in any village they passed
through, and roads, planked with thick scrub,
were a perpetual nightmare. The guerillas
were masters in the art of ambush. With the
air forces to supply and assist them they
seemed to be everywhere, and to know the
enemy’s next move. This was evident from the
casualties they inflicted against the Japanese.

141. It was after an attack by air forces on
a large concentration of Japanese troops at
Letpangon, that the Okpyat Guerilla party,
which had been pinning down the enemy until
the aircraft arrived, went out in a most success-
ful mopping-up task.

142, Captain ‘Waller reported to the R.AF.,
“We only killed 15 of them but you killed
105 in three cracking good air strikes. You
also saved the lives of almost three thousand
occupants and evacuees in Okpyat who were
completely cut off.”

Japanese Break-through from Pegu Yomas
Fails
143. The desperate and last bid by the 28th
Japanese Army to,escape across the Sittang
began on July 21st, when some 15,000 to 18,000
enemy troops, sick and demoralised, moved out
of the jungle and scrub shelter of the Pegu
omas.

144, The moment for which the squadrons
and Allied ground forces had been awaiting
had now come. The ground forces of 17
Indian Infantry Division, ranged in groups
along the 100 miles stretch of roadway between
Toungoo and Pegu, which formed part of the
railway corridor, engaged the enemy, bursting
over the road at several points simultaneously,
and slaughtered them.

145. The squadrons of 221 Group were
switched over to this battle area in support
of 17 Division, and for almost nine days air
assault was directed on the wretched Japanese
as they made desperate attempts to reach the
Sittang River.

146. From a captured enemy document it
was revealed that the main break-through from
the Pegu Yomas had been delayed by the
enemy to allow the move of the Japanese
28th Army to co-ordinate. The greater part
of the Mayazaki Group (Lt.-Gen. G.O.C. 54
Division) had planned to attempt to cross the
Sittarig between Nyaungbentha and .
(Coinciding with this move, Koba Group
(Major-General Koba) had planned another
major break out, and while the area of the

SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 19 APRIL, 1951

move was not determined, it was anticipated
that it would take place north of Toungoo in
19 Division area where troops were deploying
along the Toungoo-Mawchi Road.

147. The enemy’s plan was to form road
blocks at selected points and to pass through
them assisted by “Jitter Squads” to create
diversions. All movements were to be made
by night and the keynote of the break-through
was to be “speed” so that the maximum time
would be available for the collection of boats
and rafts from the Sittang river in order to
complete the crossing before daylight. The
enemy had planned, on reaching the Sittang.
to cross on a wide front using barges, rafts,
logs, bamboo poles and even petrol tins to
assist the buoyancy of escapees in the water.

148. It would be invidious to state that one
squadron, more than another, inflicted the
greatest punishment on the escaping enemy.
All squadrons thrown into the “ Battle of the
Bréik-through,” overcoming monsoon with
low clouds and heavy rain for long periods,
did what was expected of them with credit.
The keenness of squadron ground personnel
was equal to the occasion. They worked hard
and ungrudgingly. All, indeed, in the air, as
well as on the ground, felt that something
substantial was being accomplished in this last
show-down with the Japanese in Burma.

149. The July killing lasted until the 29th.
The Thunderbolt squadrons, carrying three
500 Ib. bombs on each aircraft, played havoc
among concentrations of moving Japanese
troops. The Spitfires too, carrying one 500 Ib.
bomb on each aircraft, pursued the enemy
relentlessly, strafing them as they ran for cover.
As many as 62 sorties were flown on July 23rd
by Nos. 152 and 155 Squadrons.

150. The extent of the full air effort by the
R.A.F. squadrons in this battle cannot be
adequately measured in the many squadron re-
ports which told of the effectiveness and killings
made during their strikes. The confusion and
disruption caused among the Japanese forces,
amounted to almost chaos. More convincing,
perhaps, were the reports sent by 12th Army
Divisional Commanders to H.Q. 221 Group,
who were not slow to express their gratitude
for the support given to their troops.

151. After almost nine days of intense fight-
ing, the attempted break out by the Japanese
from the Pegu Yomas ended in utter and com-
plete failure. More than 10,000 men were
killed, as against only three hundred odd
casualties sustained by the Allied forces. Out
of approximately 1,300 Japanese troops who
succeeded ‘in crossing the Sittang between
Meikthalin and Wegyi, it was estimated that
500 of their number had been killed during
air strikes by Spitfires and Thunderbolts.

152. The whole Japanese plan for organised
escape petered out in the closing days of July,
and the air and ground attacks were then
transferred once more to the Sittang Bend,
where the other Japanese forces, to their credit,
had held out bravely in their struggle to keep
open the last doorway leading out of Burma.
In the July battle, R.A.F. squadrons had flown
a total of 3,045 sorties—92 per cent. of which
were offensive strikes in support of ground
troops, while a total weight of 1,490,000 lb. of
bombs had been dropped.
