2164

Allies, they. would have no more aircraft left
and. the. second landing would therefore have
been easy. .

468. I refute the Japanese contention that
the first attempt at landing by the Allies would
have met with reverse. On impartial examina-
tion of the facts made available by the Japanese
after surrender, there were several major factors
which the Japanese most decidedly over-
looked. Briefly these factors were :—

() No attacks were to have been made by
Japanese suicide aicraft until dusk on D-Day,
thus giving our air forces taking part in the
large scale invasion of Malaya at least twelve
hours to neutralise, as they would have done,
Japanese aircraft in the Penang/North
Sumatra area.

_ i) R.ALF, Intelligence had estimated that

- 175 Japanese first line aircraft would be
immediately available in Malaya and
Sumatra. Of this number, only 20 were
thought to be’ bombers, and 120 fighters—
the remainder being reconnaissance and
floatplanes.

The general preparation of all the trainer
‘units in these areas for suicide attacks was
well known to the R.A.F., and the estimated
number available in Malaya and Sumatra
was 245 in Malaya and 20 in Sumatra. The
estimated number of trainer aircraft in Java
was 346.

By early September, the intended move of
the Japanese trainer,aircraft in Java to air-
fields in North Sumatra and Central Malaya

had only just got under way, so that it seems
fairly certain that many of these trainer air-
craft would never have been able to leave
Java, as the Japanese had quite overlooked
the Allied threat by our air forces established
in the Cocos Islands which had started opera-
. tions in August.

ii) It was unlikely that any reinforce-
ments of aircraft could have been withdrawn
from French Indo-China and Siam. In any
event, the numbers and types of aircraft
available from that source were negligible—

+ a fact borne out on the entry of the R.A.F.
into French Indo-China during the course of
occupation after the surrender.

(iv) Without exception the Japanese
officers interrogated after surrender were well

. aware of the fact that their communications
were so unreliable that no High Command

such as 3rd Air Army could have hoped to
control operations once “Zipper” had

_ started. Decisions, it should be noted, were

- to have been left to subordinate commanders

« and even to unit.commanding officers. This

‘ undoubtedly would have meant a great deal
of wasted effort.

(v) The Japanese had planned to rely on
air reconnaissance for advance information
on “ Zipper” and the location of targets for

*+suicide attacks in the preliminary stages of
the invasion. They were so short of aircraft
for this essential commitment, however, that
it would have been exceedingly difficult for
them to spot and hold any of the Allied
Forces. Indeed, it is more likely that com-
plete surprise would have veen achieved on
D-Day ‘by the R.A.F. units taking part in
“Zipper” and that large numbers of
Japanese aircraft would most certainly have
been .destroyed on the ground.

oo

SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 19 APRIL, 195i

. {vi) Lastly, the Japanese Air Force had
anticipated a breathing space between the
air attacks on the Penang area and the
attacks on Singapore. It is doubtful, how-
ever, if they could have withdrawn and re-
deployed many of their aircraft from that
area as well as from Sumatra without our
knowledge through superior photographic
reconnaissance.

MAINTENANCE.

Meeting the needs of overhaul in face of
advancing front

469. The Maintenance Organisation in South
East Asia was faced with two major issues
during the period May to September, 1945,
following upon the re-occupation of Rangoon
and, later, the sudden termination of hostilities
in August.

470. The influencing factors were :—— ‘

(a) The need for a re-orientation of the
‘Maintenance Organisation as the result of
the battle front having moved further away
from the static repair and overhaul bases
which had been built up in India.

(6) The termination of Lend/Lease byt
America to the United Nations following
upon the surrender of Japan, this causing
facute difficulties in providing replacements
‘and spares for American types of aircraft
dn operational use within the Command.

71. On the one hand, the re-organisation of
maintenance to meet the needs of the advanc-
ing front was not an insuperable task and soon
tighted itself once necessary changes had been
effected, but the denial of spares, on the cessa-
tion of Lend/Lease, was distinctly serious as
there were some 1,600 American aircraft and
gliders in India and South East Asia for which
spares were absolutely essential.

72. With the arrival in Southern Burma of
the victorious Air Forces in May, it was con-
sidered that a reversion from the existing cen-
tralised system of maintenance in the Theatre
should be initiated. The six months rapid ad-
vance down through Burma had been a testing
time for every branch of maintenance. Burma
could not be compared to the great flat desert
stretches of the Middle East. Transport of
the mobile units negotiated appalling roads
after an equally difficult journey from India. Aé
one time, indeed, it was doubtful if transport
would last untit Rangoon was reached.

473. These difficulties must be emphasised
because it was to this mobile ground organisa-
tion, embracing Repair and Salvage Units, Air
Stores Parks, Motor Transport, Maintenance
Units and Motor Transport Light Repair
Units, that the Air Forces in Burma were tied
and were fully depndent upon for their servic-
ing if not their very existence during opera-
tions.

474. The re-organisation of Maintenance
which took place after our arrival in Southern
Burma can be summarised as follows:—

(a) The Forward Repair Depots in the
operational areas were abolished and Sal-
vage units built up. .

(6) Group Commanders were invested
with the responsibility of repair and overhaul
of their squadron’s aircraft.
