SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 19 APRIL, 1951

64. At the beginning of July, Air Vice-Mar-
shals Sharp and Satterly arrived at Air Com-
mand on their return from the West Pacific
where they had been making preliminary
arrangements for air bases of Tiger Force.

165. I then learned that, owing to the lack of
airfields, operations by the V.H.Bs. (Very
Heavy Bombers) were not expected to begin
until the end of 1945. This delay greatly sim-
plified the problem of providing staging posts
for Tiger Force aircraft through India and
Burma since, by the time Tiger Force could
be in transit, both the monsoon and “ Zipper ”
would have finished, leaving fair-weather air-
fields available for Tiger Force in the Rangoon
area.

46. It was indicated by the visiting Air Vice-
Marshals that A.C.S.E.A. were expected to
iprovide staging facilities, not only for the
initial aircraft, but also for the reinforcement
flow and for a daily transport service of three
aircraft each way. They further expressed
the hope that the maintenance of their reserve
aircraft would be accepted by this Command.

67. I consider it worthy of note that while
Air Command South East Asia was barely
making do with transport resources of Dakotas
which still constituted the major life-line of
thé 12th Army, engaged with the Japanese at
bay in the Sittang area of Southern Burma
during July, the representatives of Tiger Force
assumed that Yorks and C.87s would be forth-
coming as a matter of course, for their trans-
port requirements.

68. Other examples of this clash in priorities

were not lacking, for it was disappointing to
Jearn from Air Ministry by signal on July 21st
that, owing to prior needs of Tiger Force, no
Lancasters or Lincolns could be expected save
for Air/Sea Rescue before mid-1946.
_ 69. My appeal to Air Ministry for Lan-
casters and Lincolns had been for no other
reason that I was concerned about the future
heavy bomber supply situation in the Com-
mand. I took the long view that we could
not expect to rely upon U.S. supplies of
Liberators and, as the result of the difficulties
which were already arising over spares and
maintenance backing, I was, therefore, anxious
to start the re-equipment of the heavy bomber
squadrons and to introduce Lancasters vice
Liberators into Air/Sea Rescue, Meteorological
and several training units.

Part If.

THE AIR WAR IN BURMA AND
BEYOND.

Arr SUPERIORITY.

Won and Maintained after Air Battles over
Arakan in 1943-44.

70. Allied air superiority in South East
Asia was won and maintained in the Theatre
after the air battles over Bengal and Burma
late in 1943 and the Spring of 1944, and re-
mained almost unchallenged until the final
surrender of the Japanese.

71. This air superiority is not always given
its full value when the fortunes of war in
Burma are weighed. ‘Without it, the history
of the indomitable 14th Army might well
have centred around a fighting force, justly
capable of defence, but not capable of sus-
tained offence. Air superiority too, meant a

2133

“safe conduct” for the air transport fleets
engaged upon air supply and reinforcing of
the advancing troops. At one time no single
Dakota in Burma could with safety have taken
the air on any supply mission had not the
air lanes been protected by our short range
fighters.

72. Air superiority, whether used for the
close support of the ground forces, or the
interdiction of lines of communication far
beyond the battle area, or in air supply or in
casualty evacuation, was indisputably ours,
a fact which Japanese Army Commanders
themselves confirmed after their surrender in
August, 1945.

73. In the Japanese Army, one Commander
had said, there had never been any real plan
to develop the Military Air Forces. The air
weapons he said, had been neglected from the
beginning in favour of ground weapons. Ever
since the China Incident, however, there had
been a growing feeling that Japanese air
power must be developed at all costs, but this
realisation had come too late, and even then,
the Army’s claims had over-ridden the long
term policy which recognised the absolute
necessity of a wide expansion of air power
and the production of aircraft.

74. Another Japanese officer, after fighting
against us in South East Asia, said that almost
always the Japanese Army had left the con-
struction of airfields until the last, having con-
centrated firstly upon its own ground defences.

Few Airfields left to J.A.F. in Burma.

75. While the main Japanese Army had re-
treated to Moulmein after the fall of Rangoon
in May, it still preserved enough strength to
make a spirited stand during July at what
came to be known as “The Battle of the
Sittang Bend.”

76. The Japanese Air Force,‘on the other
hand, had been driven out of Burma com-
pletely broken. No attempt, indeed, was’ made.
to alleviate the distress in which the thousands
of trapped Japanese forces in Burma found
themselves during July.

77. Only twelve months earlier, the Japanese
Air Force in South East Asia had made 333
sorties in May of 1944 in their last bid to
tip the scales in their favour at the siege of
Imphal, but had failed. For them, this air
effort was a record for the Japanese Air Force
for any single month when the targets were
Allied airfields and troop concentrations in the
Manipur Valley.

(78, The enemy had behind them at that time
the important air bases at Shwebo, north of
Mandalay, and, in Central Burma, they pos-
sessed the airfields at Meiktila, Magwe,
Pyinmana, Prome and Toungoo. Their most
southerly bases were those which comprised
the Rangoon group of airfields.

79, The Allies’ sweep through Burma and
the capture of Rangoon however, had taken
all these airfields from the Japanese. All that
remained to them in Southern Burma were
three serviceable airfields located at Tavoy,
Mergui and Victoria Point, on the Tenasserim
Coast, and these soon became the regular
targets for our aircraft based at Rangoon.

80. In June, 1945, yet another indication of
the weakness of the Japanese air power in
South East Asia in face of air superiority was
