1936

-day. The full link to Myingyan stanted opera-
tion on the 26th March, with an initial lift of
200 tons per day, rising to 380 tons per day
by the ist April. During April the capacity
rose until by the end of the month 575 tons
per day was reached. In four months 25,688
tons of stores had been lifted from Kalewa to
Alon and Myingyan, with a record day’s lift
of 1,147 tons.

322. In January, Railway Operating Con-
struction and Maintenance Companies were
concentrated at Manipur Road, awaiting call
forward by Fourteenth Army, to start traffic on
such stretches of the Burma Railways as proved
possible. At the same time plans for getting
in locomotives were made—a matter of some
difficulty, as the only methods available were
road and air transport. The problem was
solved with the aid of our American allies, as
will be described later. During this month, too,
the Movements and Transportation staff
attached to Fourteenth Army became part of
the new provisional Movements and Transpor-
tation, Burma, organization, while its com-
position remained much the same.

323. At the end of January I sent a signal to
the War Office, H.Q., Supreme Allied Com-
mander, South-East Asia and the Commander-
in-Chief, India, giving my views on the future
organization of my lines of communication.
These proposals were, of course, modified as
the situation developed. The basis of my pro-
posals was the progressive establishment of
districts, each coming direct under my com-
mand, as L. of C. Command would not be
able to exercise effective control as the lines of
communication extended. Coincident with the
formation of the districts would be the handing
back of territory to G.H.Q., India. I saw the
development in seven main phases. Phase J
was the establishment of 505 District for the
administration of North Burma, and part of
Central Burma. Phase II would consist of the
handing back to G.H.Q., India, of the whole of
202 Area, except for some territory round
Imphal which would pass to 505 District, and
part of 404 Area including Silchar. Geographi-
cally this roughly amounted to handing back
the Province of Assam with Shillong. Phase
UI, which was to be simultaneous with Phase
IE, consisted of the raising of 404 Area to Dis-
trict status. The importance of the Southern
L. of C. had greatly increased, as will be seen
later, with the development of the Akyab and
Kyaukpyu air supply bases. Phase IV would
consist of the abolition of L. of C. Command as
such and Phase V of the abolition of Advanced
Echelons North and South, with consequent
saving in staff. Phase VI consisted of the estab-
lishment of 606 District in South Burma in due
course, and Phase VII of the eventual handing
over of 505 and 606 Districts to the H.Q.
appointed for Burma when operations there
concluded.

324. During January certain changes in
organization of the Supply and Trarsport
system took place, whereby a basic allotment
of Supply and Transport units to formations
was fixed. By this time we were suffering from
a severe manpower shortage in R.A.S.C. and
R.LA.S.C. personnel. I obtained War Office
approval, however, for the disbanding of two
Anti-Aircraft regiments and so was able to
transfer some 400 gunners to the R.AS.C.,

SUPPLEMENT to THE LONDON GAZETTE, 12 APRIL, 1951

converting them to form supply and petrol
platoons.

A serious shortage nevertheless still re-
mained, and in February India Command
agreed to the dilution of static supply units in
tear areas with civilians, thereby releasing
soldiers to ‘reinforce forward supply units.
This scheme was extended later to include all
supply units, and a considerable number of
educated Burmese civilians in the liberated
areas volunteered. for such employment. In
addition, several entirely Burmese small sup-
ply units were formed, which proved particu-
larly useful as Local Purchase sections. The
men in these units were enrolled in the Burma
Army Service Corps.

325. A change took place during February
in the system of working the L. of C. Transport
Column. This organization has already been
referred to on more than one occasion. Some
indication of its size is given by the fact that
during the previous month (January) it oper-
ated some thirty General Transport .companies
on the 320 mile stretch of road between Dima-
pur and Kalewa. Up till February, the L. of C.
Transport Column had worked on the
“Round the Clock” system. In order to pro-
vide sufficient drivers for day and night run-
ning, it was necessary to reduce the number
of load vehicles operated by the companies.
This, together with certain other disadvantages,
resulted in the tonnage lifted being less than
the maximum which could be achieved. The
rapid advance of Fourteenth Army, the
lengthening of the road L. of C., the increased
allotment of vehicles, and the desirability of
having a more flexible organization, rendered”
it necessary to introduce a new system of
working.

326. Under this new system, all General
Transport companies operated their full scale
of vehicles, that is 120 instead of 99 under the
“Round the Clock” system, and they were
not divorced from their own workshop sec-
tions. A Commander, R.A.S.C./R.LA.S.C.
Transport Column was provided at a scale of
one for every six companies, thereby relieving
the H.Q., L. of C. Transport Column of duties
which had hitherto made it top-heavy. Finally,
the companies, as far as possible, worked
through the daylight hours only, the loading
and unloading at depots being done at night.
This system proved a success: the average time
of “tum-rounds” remained unaffected, but
the tonnage lifted increased and vehicle main-
tenance improved. The “turn-rounds” for
the vehicles of the L. of C. Transport Column
for the various sections of the road were as
follows :—

Manipur Road—Imphal/Palel, two days.
Imphal /Palel—Moreh, two days.
Moreh—Indainggyi, two days.
Indainggyi—Kalewa, one day.
Kalewa—Shwebo, three days.
Shwebo—Monywa, two days.

327. While on the subject of road transport,
I would like to add a few remarks on the work
of the R.E.MLE. and LE.MLE. Services. Most
of the road from Imphal to Kalewa especially
the mountain stretches, was very bad and
vehicles, especially the larger 5 and 10 tonners
inevitably sustained considerable damage.
This was in spite of the careful driving of
their Indian drivers, to which General Symes,
