SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 12 APRIL, 1951

The Organization was thus as follows: —

-
nd

H. Q. AL-F.S-E-A> «<7

~-
ie
a

Combined Army Air ------------Combat Cargo Task Force

Transport Organization

1943
_-- HQ. ACSEA
“""~H.Q. Eastern Air Command.
Wing H.Q. Wing H.Q. Wing H.Q.
Squadrons Squadrons

Seven R.A.M.Os «----=-- Squadrons

at rear airfields.

f.

Supply drop direct
to formations eto.

360. One thing is vital for an organization
such as C.A.A.T.O., and that is first-class
communications. Not only must the aircraft
deliver the correct loads at the right places,
but the system must be sufficiently flexible to
allow of demands being changed at very short
notice—for instance, ammunition may suddenly
be required instead of petrol where unexpected
Opposition is met. It must be possible for
demands from forward formations to be sent
‘back at top speed so as to allow the proper
sorting of these demands by C.A.A.T.O.’s staff
and for the correct instructions to be sent out
to the R.A.M.Os. Information must also be
sent back to allow the correct briefing of pilots
so that supplies are landed at the right airfield
or dropped over the right dropping zone. The
situation forward is a constantly changing one,
and in the case of supply-dropping where
units are in the jungle away from roads and
tracks, the use of a central dropping zone is
impracticable and deliveries have to be made
to each brigade or unit.

It was in this matter of communications that
C.A.A.T.O. was insufficiently well provided,
and such mistakes as occurred were in the
main attributable to this cause.. Unfortunately

i personnel and equipment were among
the most serious shortages in the theatre and
so it was not possible to bring C.A.A.T.O.’s
communications up to the standard required.

361. As Fourteenth Army’s advance pro-
gressed and the capture of Rangoon became
likely, so the necessity for increasing the air
supply lift and getting the air supply bases
forward became more pressing. The Imphal
group of airfields was particularly unecon-

~

F.AM.Os at
forward airfields

Maintenance areas.

omical as not only were they the most distant,
with a bad mountain crossing en route, but all
stores sent from them were a charge on road
transport from Manipur Road forward. This
situation had been improved by the opening
of the petrol pipeline on the 2nd March (see
paragraph 332), but by this time the airfields
were already too far behind to allow operation
at economic ranges.

The original plans for Akyab and Ramree
Advanced Bases were that all-weather airfields
would be completed at Akyab by the 30th
April for three transport squadrons, and at
Kyaukpyu for the same number by the 15th
May. These dates were, however, not nearly
early enough to support Fourteenth Army’s
rapid advance and it became necessary to
develop fair-weather airfields and to put them
into operation simultaneously with the construc-
tion of the all-weather ones. Two squadrons
of C.47 aircraft began supply operations from
Akyab on the 20th March, with No, 1
R.A.M.O. which had been switched from
Imphal, and a further two squadrons by- the
end of the month. Half a squadron operated
from Kyaukpyu during April for the supply
of troops in Arakan only. The all-weather
airfields were in fact completed in both places
in early May, when each base operated three
squadrons of C.47 transport aircraft.

362. The extent of all this development and
the effect of the increased number of aircraft
we eventually received are shown in the ton-
nage figures. The table given in paragraph
352 showed a total average daily tonnage of
247. This average rose each month until in
March, 1945, the figure of 1903 tons daily was
