1954

were actually employed to collect the supplies
dropped in the Divisional dropping zones.

432. One of the few decreases to be reported
during the period of this Despatch is in animal
transport. The decision in March to employ 5
and 17 Indian Divisions on a motor transport
basis, as well as the fly-out of 2 British Division
and later 36 British Division, entailed the pro-
gressive withdrawal of large numbers of
animals. This involved a considerable change
in the function of the Remount Service, Allied
Land Forces, South-East Asia, which was de-
signed to hold animal reinforcements at basic
wastage figures. Large numbers of animals
were collected and returned to India, while, of
complete units, it was found possible to with-
draw five Animal Transport companies and
five Field Ambulance troops to India in April.

On the veterinary side, the only contagious
disease of major importance which occurred
among animals was Epizootic Lymphangitis.
Energetic control measures were taken and
although cases were fairly numerous, the
disease did not interfere with operations.
Successful results were obtained from plastic
surgical operations, which enabled animals
suffering from saddle injuries to be quickly
taken into work again with special saddle
fittings.

433. The efficient working of the field postal
system is a very important factor in the main-
tenance of morale. In December 1944, excep-
tionally heavy Christmas mails were distributed
without delay; a large number of low medical
category British soldiers being lent to the Base
Post Office to meet the abnormal pressure of
work. In January, a daily fly-in of all classes

- of mail from Imphal to Fourteenth Army units
was introduced, and, from the experience
gained, it was decided to allot special aircraft
for mail conveyance, flying two sorties per day.
Mail deliveries which would have taken many
days by road were thus accomplished in one—
an improvement in service which was much
appreciated. Free postage concessions were
introduced early in February 1945, and con-
cessional rates for parcels in March, which
afforded substantial reductions as compared
with the old rates.

434. I am glad to be able to report an im-
provement in the Canteen Services during the
period of this Despatch, which can be judged
by the fact that the sales increased from about
23 million rupees in November 1944 to 54
million in April 1945. This increase is greatly
out of proportion to the increase in troops and
was due to the opening of more canteens and
the importation of a wider range of goods for
sale. There was, however, throughout the
campaign a serious shortage of both cigarettes
and beer. In March 1945, for example, when
Operations were at their height, the fighting
soldier had to be content with a meagre allow-
ance of 100 cigarettes and three bottles of beer
per month.

435. The problem of disposal of salvage was
difficult in this theatre. The policy was to
concentrate on the recovery of serviceable or
semi-serviceable articles (capable of re-issue as
far forward as possible) and to discourage the
collection of scrap, which, even when it could
be transported, was difficult to sell. In January
1945, the Salvage service assumed responsi-
bility for breaking down vehicles written off
by Ordnance, which by then had risen to many

SUPPLEMENT to THE LONDON GAZETTE, 12 APRIL, 1951

thousands, at the rate of 2,000 per month.
Engines and batteries were removed and re-
turned through Ordnance channels, as were a
large number of serviceable spares of other
natures, including 21,600 tyres. Other im-
portant salvage operations included the back~
Joading of 218,700 parachutes and 180,300
petrol and oil contamers, both items which
were in great demand. Over 15,000 tons of
material were salvaged between, November
1944 and April 1945, inclusive ; the estimated
value of which exceeded £1,150,000.

436. Finally, no account of administrative
matters in this campaign would be completed
without a brief mention of deficiencies in equip-
ment. These were inevitably many since the
European theatre obviously had to have
priority. In many cases lack of equipment
was partially overcome by the ingenuity and
improvisation of base and field units, and J
therefore propose to confine my remarks to
the most serious deficiencies.

437. When I assumed command in Novem-
ber 1944 the vehicle situation had become
extremely serious. This was due to four
causes. Firstly, provision action in the past
had been inadequate; secondly, there had
been very heavy wastage during the battles of
the preceding summer; thirdly, the need to
equip newly raised transport companies to sup-
port the coming offensive ; fourthly, the diffi-
culty of procuring vehicles of lend-lease origin,
bids for which had to include full operational
justification and were very carefully screened
by the American authorities in India and
Washington.

I had a close examination carried out and
ordered that future estimated production should
be allocated in detail only to essential projects.
As a result it was found that, provided pro-
duction and movement kept up to expectation,

essential commitments could be met ex-
cept for specialist vehicles, especially break-
down lorries, the need for which was increasing
owing to extended Ls. of C. and rough roads
and terrain.

The responsibility for equipping units prior
to moving them into my area rested with India
Command. But the industrial capacity of
India was stretched to the limit and many
units arrived deficient, or equipped with worn
out vehicles. This was a constant source of
anxiety and I directed that a pool of Allied
Land Forces, South-East Asia vehicles should
be held in Calcutta, from which the require-
ments of units could be met as they passed
throu, This system worked well and had
it not been initiated many units would have
gone forward badly equipped, and it would
have been impossible to re-equip 2 British and
26 Indian Divisions for the Dracula operation
at such short notice.

438. It became apparent early in 1945 that
the restriction of tyre imports to India on
account of the world shortage of rubber would
seriously affect the production of new vehicles
unless considerable economies were at once
effected. Tyres in short supply were those re-
quired for the 3-ton 4 x 4 lorry and the 15-cwt.
4 x 4truck.* Reduction in the output of these
vehicles would have had the most sérious reper-
cussions at 1a time when the increasing mobility
of operations called for the greatest possible

* A 4 x 4 lorry or truck is one in which the driving
power is transmitted to all four wheels,
