SUPPLEMENT to THs LONDON GAZETTE, 12 APRIL, 1951

able administrative planning and coordination
by my Headquarters. Not only were nearly
all the branches of the Army administrative
services affected but also the R.A.F. to a very
large extent. Unfortunately the work done on
this base was of little or no use for my current
operations or their development ; on the con-
trary, it involved a diversion of constructional
effort that I could very ill afford to spare.

337. I have mentioned above the employ-
ment of the smaller Arakan ports such as
Cox’s Bazaar and Maungdaw. As might be
expected, these came into their maximum use
in December when 15 Indian Corps’ offensive
was launched. Two jetties had been completed
at Cox’s Bazaar during the previous month and
the remaining two at this period. During
December, imports at Cox’s Bazaar, including
Ultakhali, amounted to 30,000 tons and at
Maungdaw to 20,000 tons. After the capture
and development of Akyab and Kyaukpyu in
January, the traffic at these ports declined.
Maungdaw was closed on the 31st March while
Cox’s Bazaar continued to operate on a re-
duced scale ; the jetties at Ultakhali were des-
troyed by fire in April.

338. The early stages of 15 Indian Corps’
Offensive saw two interesting and important
developments in maintenance by I.W.T., which
have already been mentioned in Part I. The
Most spectacular feat was the transportation
over the Maungdaw—Buthidaung hill road of
the 650 craft required for the maintenance of
53 Brigade (25 Indian Division) in its advance
down the Kalapanzin Valley. The most care-
ful calculation and loading were required to
enable the vehicles carrying these boats, which
were of varied types, to negotiate not only
the difficult mountain road but particularly the
tunnels which were low, narrow and winding.
The reassembling and launching of this fleet, at
Buthidaung, was completed in the remarkably
short space of five days; but this did not end
the difficulties. The intricacies of navigation
down the Kalapanzin, which in its lower
reaches is really an arm of the sea, remained.
The manner in which these navigational diffi-
culties were overcome by the Inland Water
Transport service and infantry, with the aid of
the Royal Navy, deserves the highest praise.

Meanwhile, further east on the Kaladan
River, 81 (West African) Division, which was
on air supply, had developed flotillas of local
craft for the local movement of supplies. These
they operated themselves.

339. It will be remembered from Part I that
the original operation planned for the capture
of Akyab was to have been mounted from
Chittagong. Owing, however, to the limited
capacity of the port, maintenance had to be
arranged direct from depots in India, and
despatched from Calcutta. This resulted in
loss of flexibility, so that when Akyab was
captured by a river-crossing operation on the
3rd January, it was found that the shipping
from Calcutta could not be made to arrive
before the 20th January; even then it was
loaded with stores, etc., planned for the original
February assault. The landing on the Myebon
Peninsula, which took place only nine days
after the capture of Akyab, was mounted and
maintained from that port. The export com-
mitment inevitably delayed the stores build-up
in the island, and, for a time, our resources

1939

there were slender. Energetic action, however,
overcame the emergency and the development
of Akyab as an Advanced Base began; the
build-up and maintenance being effected by sea
from India.

The next major operation was the landing at
Kyaukpyu on Ramree Island, which was
mounted from Chittagong. The reasons for the
air supply bases here and on Akyab Island
have been dealt with in Part I. The develop-
ment of the airfields and the air supply aspect
will be dealt with in the next section. The port
and Advanced Base development, however,
was an essential part of the development of
the Southern L. of C. This development began
directly Akyab and Kyaukpyu were captured.
To achieve the results required as quickly as
possible, a Sub-Area was established early in
February in each place to develop the advanced
base, and over 20,000 construction and
administrative troops were allotted to each
Sub-Area.

340. Despite the fact that shipments were
made direct from India to both Akyab and
Kyaukpyu, their intensive development placed
a very much heavier load on Chittagong.
Imports of stores rose from 23,000 tons in
January, 1945,‘to 60,000 in April, while bulk
petrol imports increased from 38,000 tons
during November, 1944, to 82,000 in April,
1945. Exports were contingent on forward re-
quirements and were not limited by port
capacity. Port working was satisfactory
throughout the period. Further development
of the Eastern Bengal Railway system was pro-
ceeding ; important improvements being made
to the railhead facilities and to the water
supply scheme for railway operation, as well as
extension of marshalling yards and loops, and
the development of stations and sidings. In
mid-March, my Headquarters assumed direct
responsibility for the Chittagong area and
ports, which had hitherto been under Head-
quarters L. of C. Command.

341. The only aspect which gave a certain
amount of anxiety was in connection with rail-
way traffic. Serious congestion began to arise
at Chittagong in mid-February due to un-
balanced arrivals by both sea and rail. This
condition was made worse later in the month
by the arrival of large quantities of Bailey
bridging. In March an embargo had to be
placed on all traffic ex India to Chittagong,
until the position could be restored by relating
and phasing despatches more closely to the
releasing capacities of the depots. This was
done during the latter half of March by im-
proving railway working in the Chittagong
district, and by the provision of more load-
carrying motor transport in the depot area.
Unfortunately congestion again occurred early
in April, and forwardings, except in the case of
priority items, had again to be restricted. A
strong contributory factor which led to this
state of affairs was the necessity, owing to the
break-up of the airfield, for moving 42,000 tons
of airfield construction stores from Chittagong
to Pathangar, halfway between Chittagong and
Comilla, in addition to the large normal
supply traffic. weet

342. An interesting side-light on the Ramree
operation deserves mention. It will be re-
membered that 26 Indian Division was
