1898

it enfiladed the other two crossings and was
patrolled by the enemy. The crossings had to
be made diagonally to avoid sandbanks, thus
lengthening the time the boats were exposed
to view and, unfortunately, the moon was
nearly full. The first assault wave on to
Ngazun Island (C Beach) was fired on, but
about one company touched town and charged
through the enemy positions. The supporting
wave, however, failed to land and the enemy
held their ground, pinning the first wave’s
boats to the beach by their fire and preventing
their return. The assault on A Beach met
heavy fire from artillery, mortars and infantry.
Many boats were sunk and the assault had to
be abandoned. The situation was serious and
it looked as if the crossing might fail, but
there remained B Beach. Here the Ist
Battalion, The Queens’ Own Cameron High-
landers, who had the longest crossing to make,
also encountered heavy fire but they effected
a gallant landing, storming up the steep 30-
foot bank and establishing a bridgehead.
Again, however, no boats got back.

89, What followed was an outstanding feat
of control, staff work and discipline. It was,
obviously, essential to reinforce with infantry
the bridgehead on B Beach at once, but this
entailed a complete change of plan. The pos-
sibility of partial failure had been foreseen and
an alternative plan had been prepared, but the
fact that it was rapidly and successfully
executed in darkness—the moon had set—
despite the inevitable confusion of the initial
failures, and despite the shortage of equipment,
many craft not having returned, reflects great
credit on all concerned, from the Divisional
Commander (Major-General C. G. G. Nichol-
son) downwards.

By first light on the 25th February, two
battalions of 5 Brigade were established com-
plete on the south bank and one battalion of
6 Brigade complete on Ngazun Island. By the
26th the whole of both 5 and 6 Brigades were
over, together with a squadron of tanks, and
on this date Ngazun Village was captured.
On the 27th February, the bridgehead had been
extended to a depth of five miles and 4 Brigade
had begun to cross, after being relieved in the
Ondaw area by 268 Indian Infantry Brigade.
268 Indian Infantry Brigade had taken over
the Sagaing area to enable 2 British Division to
concentrate on their crossing, and were respon-
sible for the open flank between 19 Indian
Division and 2 British Division. Our troops
received strong air support throughout these
operations : Ngazun was only captured after it
had been set on fire by the Royal Air Force.

90. I would like to emphasise here the mag-
nitude of Fourteenth Army’s achievement in
crossing this great river obstacle, in the face
of a brave and determined enemy and with a
minimum of modern equipment. It is worth
considering that the Irrawaddy is four times
as wide as the Rhine, while the Japanese
soldier in well prepared positions is no less
formidable than the German. It is the greatest
tribute to the Commander, officers and men
of Fourteenth Army that such a hazardous and
exacting operation was crowned with success.
By the end of February, four divisions and a
tank brigade were firmly established on the
left bank of the river.

SUPPLEMENT to rHE LONDON GAZETTE, 12 APRIL, 1951

91. Before going on to the next phase of
operations and the Japanese reactions to our
crossings, which are described in the next sec-
tion, I will draw attention to the progress made
in Northern Burma on the Northern Combat
Area Command front since my last mention of
it (paragraphs 43-47). Nambkam fell to 30
Chinese Division on the 15th January. 38
Chinese Division entered the village of Muse
on the 22nd, linking up with the Chinese
Expeditionary Force which had just captured
Wanting, thus reopening a through route from
Burma to China. The American “Mars”
Brigade were operating in the area 30 miles
north-west of Hsenwi, into which 56 Japanese
Division from the ‘Wanting area was with-
drawing. The main body of 36 British Division
(26 and 72 Brigades) was advancing south on
Mongmit and, at the end of January, it had
teached a point on the Shweli River 18 miles
to the north of that place. One detached
brigade (29 Brigade) of this Division had made
considerable progress down the east bank of
the Irrawaddy, capturing Twinnge, 15 miles
north of 19 Indian Division’s bridgehead at
Thabeikkyin on the 24th January. It then
turned due east along the main road to
Mongmit.

SEcTION VI (paras. 92-101) THe SITUATION IN
FEBRUARY

A.L.F.S.E.A, Operation Instruction of the
27th February, 1945: The change in scope of
the Burma operations: The Japanese plans for
a counter-offensive: Operations to enlarge our
bridgeheads: The Northern Combat Area
Command front.

92. Directly it became apparent that our
crossings of the Irrawaddy had succeeded over
a wide front, I issued, on the 27th February,
an Operation Instruction to General Slim,
General Sultan and General Christison in order
to co-ordinate operations in the immediate
future. Jt will be remembered that on the
26th January, the Chiefs of Staff had promised
to increase our transport aircraft to meet our
essential requirements by the Ist March. ‘With
this in mind, I instructed Fourteenth Army to
destroy the Japanese forces in the Mandalay
area and to capture Rangoon before the
monsoon. Northern Combat Area Command
were directed to seize the general area
Kyaukme—Lashio and then to turn south-west
and co-operate in the Mandalay area battle.
After this they were to exploit out towards
Loilem. 15 Indian Corps, whose tasks I had
already a month before extended to include
developing the air bases on Akyab and Ramree
Islands for the supply of Fourteenth Army,
and to operations as far south as Taungup,
were now directed, in general, to contain the
maximum number of enemy forces, particu-
larly by operating up the An and Taungup—
Prome routes. (These operations by 15 Indian
Corps will be discussed in detail in a later part
of this Despatch.) Since this Operation In-
struction contains my brief appreciation of the
situation at the time, I have attached a copy
at Appendix A.

93. It will be seen at once that the outline
of operations given above represents a great
development from the situation in November,
1944. Then we were directing our efforts to
enable us to launch a major expedition against
