1884

1945 monsoon. The airborne and air-traus-
ported part of the operation, which was con-
sidered essential owing to the difficulties of a
purely seaborne assault on Rangoon, was to be
mounted in the Chittagong area and a big
programme of building of fair-weather air
strips, with all the necessary ancillaries such
as fuel installations, had been approved. In
order that these could be ready for a post-1945-
monsoon assault, I was directed to continue
the construction required. These pre-monsoon
preparations were naturally at the cost of re-
sources I wanted for my current operations.

The scale and concept of Dracula in its
original form should be borne in mind when
the way in which Rangoon was captured is
described at the end of this part of the
Despatch. The difference between the pro-
jected operation of early October, 1944, and
the actual operation of May, 1945, is the true
measure of the development of the operational
situation in Burma between those dates.

12. As soon as it was known that the air
and sea invasion of Rangoon (Dracula) could
not be carried out before the 1945 monsoon, a
fresh operation (Romulus) was planned in
Arakan. The situation there was unsatisfac-
tory, as we had four divisions locked up by the
Japanese threat of an advance up the Kaladan
Valley. .This threat, which was by a force
much inferior in numbers to our own, could
best be liquidated by the capture of Akyab
Island, Myebon and Minbya. With this
achieved, the Arakan garrison of four divi-
sions could be reduced to one of four brigades
during the coming monsoon, and valuable
divisions thereby released for further opera-
tions, thus partially -offsetting the non-arrival
of formations from Europe.

13. To recapitulate in brief, the tasks of the
formations under my command at the time I
took over were as follows.

Northern Combat Area Command to recap-
ture and secure the trace of the Burma Road
from its junction with the new road from Ledo
and to hold the Myitkyina air bases.

Fourteenth Army to get into the dry belt
of Central Burma in order to defeat the main
Japanese armies and thus ensure permanent
security to the Ledo/Burma Road, to develop
airfields there, and to provide an “ anvil” for
the invasion of Rangoon after the 1945
monsoon.

Fifteenth Corps in Arakan to liquidate the
remaining Japanese threat in that sector by a
limited offensive to just beyond Akyab, in
order that formations could be withdrawn to
take part in post-monsoon offensive operations
against Rangoon or elsewhere.

14. On the 4th November, eight days before I
assumed command, the Supreme Allied Com-
amander had issued an Operational Directive to
his three Commanders-in-Chief, regarding an
offensive in Arakan, instructing them jointly to
initiate the planning, and direct the execution
of the following tasks.

An advance by land was to be made down
the Mayu Peninsula and the Kalapanzin and
‘Kaladan Valleys with the object of clearing the
area north of the general line Foul Point-
Kudaung Island-Minbya. This advance was to
fbegin as soon as possible.

SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 12 APRIL, 1951

An amphibious assault on Akyab Island was
to be launched as early as possible in 1945,
with the aim of clearing the island by the end
of January. The area north of the line Akyab-
Minbya was to be consolidated but no
exploitation was to take place south of Myebon
without the Supreme Allied Commander’s
authority.

On the 9th November, General Giffard had
issued an Operation Instruction to the Com-
mander, 15 Corps, defining his task in Arakan
in accordance with the above Directive.

15. A week after I had assumed my new
Command, the Supreme Allied Commander
issued a Planning Directive (19th November)
in which he ordered plans to be made for the
execution of “the stages of operation Capital
[the plan for the advance into Central Burma]
necessary to the security of existing air supply
routes and the opening of land communications
with China and the exploitation of Capital
throughout 1945 as far as may be possible
without prejudicing the preparation for the
execution of Dracula [the plan for the am-
phibious assault on Rangoon} at the very
earliest date possible after the end of the mon-
soon in 1945.” (1 quote the actual words of
the. directive.)

After stating that the plans for operations to
secure the general line Kalewa-Shwebo-Mogok-
Lashio (Phase II of operation Capital) had
received his approval, the Supreme Allied
Commander further directed me in conjunc-
tion with the Allied Air Commander-in-Chief,
to initiate and co-ordinate plans for the execu-
tion of Phase III, with the object of securing
the genera! line Pakokku-Mandalay-Maymyo-
Lashio.

I was also directed “to bear in mind the
paramount importance of destroying the maxi-
mum number of Japanese during this Phase,
so as to prevent their withdrawal to South
Burma and to facilitate subsequent exploita-
tion.” This was fully in accordance with my
own views since I had already decided in my
own mind that the Mandalay Plain, for the
reasons I have already explained, should be
the graveyard of the Japanese armies. I may
add that I found when I met General Slim
that he had long been of the same opinion and
that his future strategy was directed to this
end.

16. Another Directive which I received about
this time (18th November) informed me that
the British Chiefs of Staff had ordered that the
Cocos Islands, lying midway between Ceylon
and Australia and some 1,500 miles from each,
were to be developed early in 1945 as an air
staging point for heavy aircraft in transit. I
was called on to provide for the land defence
of these islands, in consultation with the Naval
and Air Commanders-in-Chief ; the target date
given for the completion of the development of
the islands being the Ist June, 1945.

I may add here that the Army component of
the garrison eventually decided on was one
battalion, one Coast and two A.A. batteries,
and certain Engineer and Pioneer companies.
The disembarkation of troops and stores com-
menced on the 25th March, 1945, and was
completed without enemy interference.

- 17. There is one other project that arose
during the period under consideration. In a
