SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 12 APRIL, 1951

and to them I allotted both operational and
administrative responsibility between the Dalet
Chaung and Gwa. I also instructed General
Stockwell to patrol east of the Taungup—
Prome road to establish contact with 33 Corps
as the monsoon conditions made it impossible
to move the whole Division on this route.

277. 4 Corps operations during May, 1945:
5 Indian Division was ordered to open the
road from Payagyi to Mokpalin and also clear
the area between Pegu and the southern end
of the Pegu Yomas of enemy. 9 Indian In-
fantry Brigade opened the road as far as Waw
against determined Japanese resistance, and
then continued towards the Sittang River. The
heavy rainfall, however, rendered the deploy-
ment of tanks and artillery difficult if not im-
possible, as the west bank of the Sittang is
flat and, during May, flooded. With the enemy
overlooking them from jungle-clad hills on the
east bank and without adequate river-crossing
equipment it was not possible to launch an
attack to capture Mokpalin, or do more than
patrol across the Sittang River on a wide front,
until after the monsoon.

‘Meanwhile 123 and 161 Brigades were en-
gaged in widespread patrols under appalling
climatic conditions, seeking out the numerous
Japanese in the area to the south of the Pegu
Yomas. Throughout the month their toll of
Japanese dead mounted; the enemy became
desperate in their attempts to escape, and on
occasions would deliver fierce attacks upon
our patrols.

Meanwhile 17 Indian Division was disposed
between Penwegon and Nyaunglebin, and spent
the whole month in most active patrolling,
designed to kill the enemy wherever found and
to prevent a concentrated attempt at a break
out. In this they were highly successful, and
proved conclusively their superiority to the
Japanese in this type of operation. As an
example, at Konin on the 21st May a patrol
of 99 Brigade in one encounter killed 148
Japanese at a cost to themselves of 4 wounded.

19 Indian Division from Toungoo had by the
10th May advanced 5 miles along the road to
Thandaung, but 98 Brigade, the leaders, were
being strenuously opposed. On this date 62
Brigade, with tank support, took over the
lead and fought its way forward in the face
of extensive mining of the road and determined.
resistance from prepared positions on the high
ground dominating the area. On the 25th May
98 Brigade took over again, and three days
later captured the road junction at Thandaung,

though pockets of the enemy continued to hold”

‘out in the surrounding hills.

278. It is convenient at this juncture to deal
with 64 Indian Infantry Brigade and the opera-
tions on the Thazi—Taunggyi road. On the
10th May it relieved 36 British Division,
which was due for withdrawal from operations
after a year’s hard fighting from Myitkyina in
the north to Thazi. The Brigade met most
determined resistance in the locality known aptly
as “ The Staircase”, 12 miles north of Kalaw.
Here 56 Japanese Division, probably the least
battered formation left in the Burma Area Army
had a well prepared defensive position sup-
Ported by artillery. However, after prolonged
and bitter fighting “The Staircase” fell to

60332

1929

our troops on the 3lst May and Kalaw was
entered a week later.

279. 33 Corps operations in May : The opera-
tions of 33 Corps in May consisted initially
of an advance south by'20 Indian Division on
the east of the Irrawaddy to meet 26 Indian
Division marching from Rangoon north to‘
Prome, and thereby to seal off the enemy
forces, which consisted of elements of 54 and
55 Japanese Divisions, and 72 Independent
Mixed Brigade, to the west of the Irrawaddy.
At the same time 7 Indian Division, 268
Indian (Independent) Infantry Brigade and
the Lushai Brigade, were driving the enemy
south before them down the west bank of the
Irrawaddy, and so closing the net. The link-
up between 20 and 26 Indian Divisions was
made on the 15th May at Taikkyi, 60 miles
morth of Rangoon, and 26 Indian Division
then came under command of 33 Corps.

As had been anticipated, the enemy now
attempted to concentrate on the west bank of
the Irrawaddy in the general area Thayetmyo—
Kama, and to force his way across into the
Pegu Yomas. General Stopford accordingly
directed 7 Indian Division to operate against
his crossings on the west bank of the river be-
tween Allanmyo and Kama, while 20 Indian
Division consolidated the Prome—Rangoon
road and railway axis and prevented the enemy
establishing escape gaps across the river into
the Pegu Yomas. 20 Indian Division was also
ordered to push west on the Prome—Taungup
road to make contact with patrols of 82 (West
African) Division and so cut off stragglers from
55 Japanese Division.

In early May under the increasing pressure
of 7 Indian Division, the Japanese began their
attempts to break-out east over the river. 54
Japanese Division succeeding in establishing a
bridgehead at Zalon, 10 miles north of Prome
while one regiment of 49 Japanese Division
and 2 Japanese Brigade actually succeeded in
crossing just north of Prome and making good
their escape. '

General Stopford, faced with the problem of
trying to prevent all escape crossings over some
50 miles of river with the limited number of
troops available, decided to concentrate against
the Zalon bridgehead, First 80 Brigade of 20
Indian Division and later 33 Brigade of 7 Indian
Division were directed against the bridgehead
and throughout the remainder of May both 7
and 20 Indian Divisions were involved in much
bitter fighting against the enemy concentrations
on the west bank and against the crossings.

Most of these crossings were destroyed or
‘beaten back, but some small parties were able
to slip across the river.

Very heavy casualties were inflicted on the
enemy during this period and by the end of
May the fighting in the Zalon area had reached
its conclusion. The west bank was virtually
clear of the enemy and those who had suc-
ceeded in crossing were being hunted into the
foothills of the Pegu Yomas. 268 Indian
Infantry Brigade was left on the west bank to
mop up the stragglers.

280. Bassein was occupied by a battalion
group of 6 Brigade without opposition on the
25th May, our troops receiving a joyous wel-
come from the local inhabitants.

D
