SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 12 APRIL, 1951

136. The Supreme Allied Commander had,
on the 4th November, directed that plans
were to be prepared and executed to accomplish
the above object as follows :—

(@) A land advance, to start as soon as
the drying of the ground allowed it, down
the Mayu Peninsula and the Kalapanzin and
Kaladan Valleys, with the object of clearing
the area north of a general line Foul Point
—Kudaung Island—Minbya.

. (6) An amphibious assault on Akyab
Island to take place as early as possible, with
the aim of clearing the island by the end of
January.

(c) Consolidation of the area north of the
line Akyab—Minbya, but no exploitation
to take place south of Myebon without the
Supreme Allied Commander’s authority.
These instructions had been passed on to the

Commander, 15th Indian Corps, by General

Giffard in an Operation Instruction dated the

9th November.

137. General Christison’s plan to fulfil these
directions for the clearing of Northern
Arakan was as follows: 25 Indian Division
(Major-General G. N. Wood) was to clear the
Mayu Peninsula, and seize Foul Point and
Kudaung Island. 82 (West African) Division
(Major-General G. McI. S. Bruce) was to
operate inland, as left flank guard to 25 In-
dian Division’s advance, along the general axis
of the Mayu River as far as Htizwe. This
entailed the capture of Buthidaung and the
crossing of the Kalapanzin River. On arrival
at Htizwe, the Division was to turn east, over
the Kanzauk Pass, and relieve 81 (West
African) Division in the Kaladan Valley, and
thence continue south towards Myebon. About
30 miles further inland, separated from 82
(West African) Division by a considerable
range of hills, 81 (West African) Division
(Major-General F. J. Loftus-Tottenham) con-
sisting of only two brigades, was allotted the
task of clearing the Kaladan Valley as far as
Myohaung, by an advance down the axis of
the Pi Chaung and the Kaladan River. After
Myohaung, it was to hand over to 82 (West
African) Division, and withdraw into Corps
Teserve at Chiringa as the first step towards the
reduction of formations in Arakan. 26 Indian
Division (Major-General C. E. N. Lomax)
with 3 Commando Brigade under command,
was to capture Akyab by a seaborne assault
mounted from Chittagong and then to exploit
eastwards through the chaung country to the
line Minbya—Myebon, while 82 (West African)
Division came down the road from Myohaung.
It will be seen from this plan that the main
thrust was down the coast where our mobility
could be exploited, while the two African
divisions inland kept the enemy spread on a
broad front, preventing him from concentrat-
ing in the coastal sector and safeguarding the
land communications, first of 25 Indian
Division and later of the rear of 15 Indian
Corps. We thus would eliminate the threat of
Japanese outflanking operations, hitherto a
worry.

138. As far as the timings of these opera-
tions were concerned, the advance of 81 (West
African) Division was to begin first, and it
was to secure the general line from Kaladan
Village westwards to the Pi Chaung by the
lst December. The advance in the Mayu
sector was not due to start until the 12th

1907

December, by which date the country would
dry up sufficiently to allow the movement
of armour and guns, and for air support to be
given from fair-weather strips. Nevertheless,
15 Indian Corps carried out what amounted
to a preliminary offensive prior to this date.
All ground which we had voluntarily vacated
west of the Kalapanzin River prior to the
monsoon was re-occupied, while, in the coastal
sector, 25 Indian Division reached Udaung 13
miles south-east of Maungdaw. The first
objective allotted to 25 Indian Division and
82 (West African) Division when the main
offensive opened was the general line Indin—
Htizwe, which was to be secured by the 31st
December.

139. In the matter of ground communica-
tions, the advantage lay with the Japanese in
that they controlled the mouths of the Mayu,
Kywede and Kaladan Rivers, the Htizwe—
Kanzauk jeep track, and the road south from
Kyauktaw, on the Kaladan, to Myohaung.
These advantages were, however, counter-
acted by the fact that our advance down the
coast could be based on the sea, while,
further east, the Kalapanzin waterway from
Buthidaung could be used to supply any
parallel advance in that area. In the Kaladan
Valley, the enemy’s river and road communi-
cations were offset by the fact that 81 (West
African) Division was on air supply, with the
consequent freedom of manoeuvre which it
allowed.

140. The plan of 25 Indian Division was,
briefly, for 74 Brigade to advance down the
coastal plain, “cutting its tail” as it went and
being supplied from the sea, while 53 Brigade
advanced down the Kalapanzin Valley, being
supplied by air until the Kalapanzin River
could be opened for Inland Water Transport
from Buthidaung. 51 Brigade was to follow,
and clear enemy pockets which had been by-
passed in the Mayu hills. The essence of this
plan was our refusal to present General
Sakurai with his favourite target—a vital
maintenance road in our rear. The Divisional
Artillery was supplemented by the support of
two destroyers which, as events proved, filled
a most useful réle in shelling enemy hill posi-
tions defiladed from our own guns. The chief
task during the planning period was to pro-
cure sufficient boats to maintain the advance
of 53 Brigade and to arrange for their over-
land transportation through the narrow tunnels
on the Maungdaw—Buthidaung hill road across
the Mayu Range to the Kalapanzin River.
Some 650 craft were required for this
project.

141. In 82 (West African) Division, 4
Brigade had already relieved a brigade of 26
Indian Division in Taung Bazaar. The re-
mainder of 82 (West African) Division was to
concentrate just prior to D-Day (12th Decem-
ber) astride the Buthidaung road, immediately
east of the Mayu spine, whence a simul-
taneous advance was to made by
2 Brigade, with tank support, on Buthi-
daung and by 1 Brigade further south
on Baguna. 1 Brigade was then to
cross the Kalapanzin River and capture the
high ground on the east bank. This feature
dominated the river and the 53 Brigade
“regatta,” mentioned at the end of the pre-
ceding paragraph, could not start until it was
