1920

consisting of 5 and 17 Indian Divisions, with
255 Indian Tank Brigade and one armoured
car regiment, was to secure Pyawbwe, strike at
Japanese -forces and concentrate for a thrust
south. 33 Corps was to clear Mandalay—
Maymyo—Kyaukse, to operate 20 Indian
Division to the south and the south-west, to
operate 2 British Division south-west, and
move 19 Indian Division south to follow up
and take over from 4 Corps up to Meiktila.
The instructions for the advance south stated
that Fourteenth Army with 19 Indian Division
would hold secure the area Mandalay—Thazi
—Meiktila. 4 Corps was to capture Rangoon
at all costs before the monsoon. 33 Corps was
to capture Seikpyu and Chauk first, containing
Yenangyaung, then capture in succession
Magwe, Yenangyaung, Prome and finally
Rangoon, if possible before 4 Corps.

218. The magnitude of the undertaking
should be noted. About five weeks were
available before the monsoon broke. Its
arrival would cut the land line of communica-
tion from Kalewa to Shwebo and vastly
increase the difficulties of air supply. The
serious consequences of the delay imposed on
our advance by the transfer of airlift and
forces to China (see paragraphs 51 and 52)
were now fully apparent. To reach Rangoon
in time meant that Fourteenth Army’s advance
had to average at least ten miles a day against
opposition and despite demolitions—a formid-
able proposition. There was also the very dis-
turbing possibility that the Japanese, instead
of withdrawing their defeated forces south-
wards, would retire into the mountains that lay
to the east of the road and railway between
Mandalay and Rangoon. Maintenance would
be possible by the road from the Lampang rail-
head in Siam, via Kengtung, Takaw and
Loilem. The presence of such a force on our
flank would inevitably have weakened the drive
south, while we certainly could not afford to
operate eastwards against it in any strength.
Fortunately, this threat did not materialize.

219. I had, for some time, been considering
the necessity of a subsidiary operation to assist

Fourteenth Army. At the end of March, I .

decided that I must recommend to the Supreme
Allied Commander that a sea-borne attack on
-Rangoon, in addition to Fourteenth Army’s
thrust, was essential. .
220. Both General Slim and I were full of
hope that Fourteenth Army would reach
Rangoon before the monsoon, despite the diffi-
culties which faced them. But at the same
time I had to take into account the possibility
of failure to do so. It is not too much to
say that the results of such failure would have
been disastrous. The long land L. of C.—it
is over 600 miles from Manipur Road railhead
to Meiktila—was not designed to withstand
monsoon conditions, as an important length
of the road, running from Kalewa to Shwebo,
about 108 miles, was constructed to fair-
weather standard only. Air supply on a con-
siderable scale was in any case essential to
supplement what came by land and river. But
during the monsoon, flying conditions were
often hazardous, and would certainly inter-
tupt air supply altogether for periods, at a
time when our land L. of C. was interrupted
and possibly the I.W.T. traffic on the Chindwin
was reduced too. Moreover, I knew, and the
Americans had been quite candid and warned

SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 12 APRIL, 1951

me, that if we did not get into Rangoon by
June, their American transport aircraft which
formed a large proportion of the theatre re-
sources, would be taken off to China. Thus
we might well have the position where our
troops, halted only a comparatively short dis-
tance from Rangoon by the monsoon rains,
would have to be withdrawn back to Manda-
Jay or even to the Chindwin, with all the
attendant losses in vehicles and morale, for
reasons of supply. How real this danger was,
was afterwards proved by the fact that, even
after Rangoon was captured and opened in
May, the R.A-F. were unable, at times, during
the June monsoon rains, adequately to supply
even the small forces which we still had to
maintain in Central Burma. General Slim
had repeatedly asked me to put in an amphi-
bious operation to assist his army to capture
Rangoon, because he felt he could not guaran-
tee reaching it before the rains.

221. In the early part of this Despatch (para-
graph 11) I mentioned that a combined opera-
tion for the capture of Rangoon, known as
Dracula, had had to be postponed. This
operation was, however, never actually
cancelled. As far back as the Sth February,
the Supreme Allied Commander had issued a
Directive in which my tasks were defined as
follows: “To secure the Ledo—Burma road,
capture Rangoon by 1st June, 1945, open the’
port of Rangoon and destroy the main Japan-
ese forces in Burma, excluding the Tenasserim
coast.” In this Directive the Commander-in-
Chief, East Indies Fleet, was instructed “To
furnish such Naval support and amphibious
resources as may be’ required for combined
operations,” and, mention was also made of
the Indian Airborne Division, which was to be
held under the Supreme Commander’s opera-
tional control. This amounted, in effect, to.
“Operation Dracula,” though in a modified
form, and I considered the time had now come
to put it into effect, that is, to carry out a com-
bined sea, land and air operation against
Rangoon, though on a much smaller scale than
was originally planned.

222. Everything indicated that the enemy
was going to make determined efforts to halt
us in the Yenangyaung area on the Irrawaddy
axis, and that we should meet defence.in depth
on the road-railway axis to the east. From
captured documents and the evidence of Staff
officers obtained later it is clear that the enemy
intended to halt us successively at Pyawbwe,
Pyinmana and Toungoo. It was only his in-
ability to carry out the necessary moves in
time that prevented these plans from fully
materialising.

223. Moreover, there was the problem of
Rangoon itself. The garrison was at this time
known to be some 10,000 strong. Although
these were largely Base troops, experience in
Manila and elsewhere in the Pacific theatre
had shown that these troops were capable of
stubborn and suicidal defence, and I had had
no indication from my Intelligence that the
enemy might abandon Rangoon. Nor with the
clearing of Rangoon town itself was the prob-
Jem by any means solved. Before supplies could
be brought in by sea, the twenty-four odd
miles of the Rangoon River approach had to
be cleared of mines; and naturally the mine-
sweepers could not start until the banks weré
cleared of enemy. It was not difficult to foresee
