1946

Command, South-East Asia) and its adminis-
trative echelon became Headquarters, R.AF.,
Bengal/ Burma.

374. The Strategic Air Force, with its Head-
quarters in Calcutta, operated the strategic
bomber squadrons, some of which were based
on airfields in the Allied Land Forces, South-
East Asia area, for whose construction and
maintenance my engineers were responsible.
The air supply part of air operations was con-
trolled by the Combat Cargo Task Force which
was formed shortly after my arrival. The air
transport service to China was operated by the
U.S. Air Transport Command, but a consider-
able proportion of my Allied Land Forces,
South-East Asia engineer resources was devoted
to the construction of airfields and associated
installations in North-East Assam. The ground
operations of Northern Combat Area Com-
mand were supported by 10 U.S.A.A.F., and
the airfield engineer works in this area were
largely constructed by American engineer avia-
tion battalions, although the Divisional en-
gineers of 36 British Division provided their
own light aircraft strips.

375. To meet the air forces organization
described above, my Chief Engineer (Major-
General K. Ray, seconded from the U.D.F.),
working under the Engineer-in-Chief, South-
East Asia Command, through the Deputy
Engineer-in-Chief (Air), exercised technical
control over the Deputy Chief Engineer, Four-
teenth Army, and formed the link on airfield
matters with Headquarters, Eastern Air Com-
mand and Combat Cargo Task Force. When
I moved my Advanced Headquarters from
Delhi to Barrackpore, the Deputy Engineer-
in-Chief (Air) also moved there from Comilla,
and the air elements of the Allied Land Forces,
South-East Asia engineer staff came under his
control. He worked with Headquarters, R.AF.
Bengal/Burma, which as I have stated above
was the administrative echelon of the R.AF.
Headquarters. When the development of Akyab
and Ramree airfields was undertaken, special
engineer forces were formed for airfield de-
velopment under the direct control of my
Headquarters.

376. In describing the engineer work carried
out I have divided work into various categories.
First, the Base airfields for both strategic and
tactical squadrons, next the transport airfields
(excluding those for the China supply lift), then
those built for the China lift, then some mis-
cellaneous airfield work in the rear areas, and
lastly and in greater detail, the forward air-
field construction, including the development
of the Advanced Bases at Akyab and Ramree.

Description
Runways
Taxi tracks tee
Aircraft standings we
Aircraft parking aprons
Roads... we an
Accommodation
Covered Storage

The effect of these works on the air supply
lift to China is indicated by the fact that the
lift was trebled between June, 1944, and
March, 1945, as shown by the following figures.

June 1944 March 1945
No. of completed sorties
3,702 11,347

per month ... tee
Tons lifted to China... 14,150 41,580

SUPPLEMENT To tHe LONDON GAZETTE, 12 APRIL, 1951

377. Of the Base airfields, the bulk of those:
which were intended for the Strategical Air
Force were sited in India, but thirteen bomber
airfields had been constructed by the Chief
Engineer, Fourteenth Army. Three of these
were later transferred to the Engineer-in-Chief,
India Command, and of the remaining ten, five
were used by medium and light bombers during.
the period covered by this Despatch, and the
other five were converted for use by transport
aircraft and fighters. During the early stages
of Fourteenth Army and 15 Indian Corps’
offensive, base airfields were used by tactical
squadrons, fighters operating from Imphal and
Palel, and also from the bomber fields at Kum-
birgram, Chittagong, Chiringa, Cox’s Bazaar
and Comilla, which were adapted to meet
fighter requirements.

378. Initially, the air supply lift for Four-
teenth Army was flown from bomber airfields.
which had been converted for this purpose.
The airfields used were Sylhet, Comilla, Fenny
and Chittagong, and supplies were carried to
the airfields in the Imphal Plain. The increase
in the tonnage carried has already ‘been
described. All this had to be met by more
maintenance, development and construction by
the airfields engineers. The building of the
advanced air bases will be described under
forward airfield development. I will only add
here that during the year ending the 31st
March, 1945, 550,000 tons of supplies and
stores had been carried by air to forward areas
from airfields constructed by Allied Land
Forces, South-East Asia engineers.

379, The American air lift to China reached
gigantic proportions considering the difficulty
of the route, and it has received world-wide
publicity. What is not so generally realised,
and certainly received less publicity, is that the
airfields in North-East Assam to support this
traffic, were built almost entirely by British
agency, first under the Chief Engineer, 11 Army
Group, until November, 1944, and thereafter by
the Chief Engineer, L. of C. Command. One
United States engineer battalion assisted in the
later stages. Owing to the diversity of the
works, it is not practicable to give full details of
the construction undertaken during the period
covered by this Despatch, but the following
table shows the situation at about the time I
took over command in November, 1944, giving
the work completed. and ‘the amount in hand as
regards the eleven all-weather airfields in
North-East Assam:

Completed Under Construction
13 miles _
25 miles 7 miles
486 20
37 acres 23 acres
80 miles 23 miles
33,106 men _
63 acres 44 acres

380. A considerable amount of other rear
airfield work was undertaken in the L. of C.
Command area, in addition to what has been
mentioned in the preceding paragraphs. For
example, twenty-one fair-weather satellite air-
fields had to be maintained. These had been
out of action during the monsoon and subse-
quent drainage and repair work was heavy.
