SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 12 APRIL, 1951

such a move would be feasible, and, on the
18th November, 4 Corps were allowed to direct
the whole of 19 Indian Division, which had
moved forward from Imphal to the Tamu—
Sittaung area, on to Pinlebu. In addition to
Teconnoitring routes east of this place, 19
Indian Division was given the task of discover-
ing whether the roads from Pinlebu southwards
could be opened for a further overland
advance. By this means, coupled with the
operations of 33 Corps, the possibility of com-
pleting Phase Il of Capital without airborne
operations was to be investigated. The two
Jeading brigades of 19 Indian Division began
to cross the Chindwin at Sittaung and Thaung-
dut in the third week of November and, by
the end of the month, had occupied Nanbon
and Paungbyin against minor opposition.

Meanwhile, in the middle of November, 4
Corps took over 268 Indian Brigade—an inde-
pendent formation composed of five battalions
—from 33 Corps. The leading elements of this
Brigade were, at this time, disposed on the east
bank of the Chindwin, opposite Sittaung. 7
Indian Division (Major-General F. W.
Messervy) which was also to form part of 4
Corps, was still resting in the Kohima area.
It was not to be committed across the Chind-
win, as, at this period, it was expected it might
be required later to be flown into the Shwebo
area as a reinforcement.

In Northern Combat Area Command,
36 British Division (Major-General F. W.
Festing) on the 30th November captured
Pinwe, six miles north of the important rail-
way junction of Naba, after the village had
been fiercely defended by the enemy for over
two weeks. The Japanese left behind many
dead and much equipment. 38 Chinese Divi-
sion had occupied Myothit, 16 miles north-east
of Bhamo, and pushing on had encircled
Bhamo itself and the air-strip east of the town,
despite strong enemy counter-attacks. Other
Chinese troops were advancing down the
Bhamo-Namhkam and Bhamo-Mongmit roads.

24. Bearing in mind the undoubted fighting
qualities of the Japanese soldier, and the fact
that the enemy was operating on interior lines,
his strength of ten and two-third divisions (with
auxiliary troops) appeared formidable. The
question was how much of this force could be
concentrated against Fourteenth Army, or, in
other words, how many divisions we could
force the enemy to employ against Northern
Combat Area Command and in Arakan, in
order to weaken this concentration.

Northern Combat Area Command comprised
5332 (“Mars”) Brigade, which was the
equivalent of an American light division, and
five Chinese divisions. The latter had little
administrative tail, as the Americans provided
much of the administration, and were smaller
than Indian divisions. They also varied a good
deal in their state of training. ‘While it was
unlikely that the Japanese could be induced
to send more troops to this front, provided
that the pressure by Northern Combat Area
Command did not weaken, they might at least
be expected not to withdraw any substantial
force from it. There were two enemy divisions
in the coastal sector, including Bassein. It was
hoped that, in spite of the advantages of
terrain and communications which the Japanese
defence enjoyed, they would not be able to

1887

reduce this force by more than a regiment or
two. In the south of Burma, our deception
schemes were framed with the object of tying
down the garrison there, which amounted to
rather less than two divisions.

Thus I hoped that Fourteenth Army might
not be opposed by a force greater than five
Japanese divisions, one independent mixed
brigade, a tank regiment and approximately
50,000 L. of C. and auxiliary troops.

25. The Commander, Fourteenth Army, had
at his disposal six and two-third divisions (2
British Division, 5, 7, 17, 19 and 20 Indian
Divisions), 268 Indian Brigade, 28 (East
African) Brigade, and two Indian tank brigades
(254th and 255th). But our transportation
resources, air and road, were limited and it
appeared impossible to maintain more than
four and two-third divisions and two tank
brigades beyond the Chindwin.

To launch an offensive, across a great river
(the Chindwin) and with precarious communi-
cations, with only four and two-third divisions
against five and one-third, even though some -
of the latter had been badly mauled, was
to take a risk. But it was a calculated risk.
Our troops had already shown themselves to
be superior to the enemy and, once we reached
open country, our superiority in armour, fire-
power and mobility would tell.

26. I relied also upon two other great assets
in particularm—our complete sea and air
supremacy. As will be seen from the narra-
tive of operations, it was thanks to sea power
that we were able to capture and then to stock
and operate the great air bases on Akyab and
Ramree Islands, upon which the air supply of
Fourteenth Army so much depended. Sea and
air power enabled us to deliver the final assault
on Rangoon.

27. The factor of air supremacy was of the
highest importance. In jungle fighting, tactical
mobility is afforded by air transport. Air
supply allows the carrying out of the out-

nking manoeuvres necessary’ to pin enemy
resistance, by-pass it, and isolate or destroy it.
By the use of air lines of communication, as
with sea lines of communication, not only are
the tenuous and limited overland routes supple-
mented, but one checkmates the Japanese
technique of establishing road blocks in one’s
tear ; the advance can continue unchecked and
the enemy detachments are left to starve or are
mopped up in due course.

Supply by air formed a large and vital part
of the whole gigantic transportation effort which
the prosecution of this campaign entailed. The
full details appear in the Administrative part
of this Despatch. It is enough here to say that
during the peak month of April, 1945, when
Fourteenth Army was racing for Rangoon,
over 68,100 tons were delivered by air, over
11,000 men were brought forward and nearly
10,000 casualties evacuated. The stores carried
by air included engines and other essential
material for the building of the Inland Water
Transport fleet at Kalewa, which was to operate
the inland water transport supply link to
Myingyan, and the light locomotives which
were to Operate on stretches of railway east of
the Irrawaddy.

Throughout the campaign, the availability of
aircraft for supply and transport was a major
influence on the course of operations.
