SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 12 APRIL, 1951

was begun. This feat was completed in five
days, on the 21st December. On the fleet of
over 600 craft the maintenance and transport
of 53 Brigade depended. It will be remem-
bered (paragraph 140) that they had been
collected at Maungdaw and then transported
across the Mayu Range, by the hill road and
its tunnels, to Buthidaung.

150. Meanwhile, by the 18th December,
53 Brigade had occupied Seinnyinbya, seven
miles south of Buthidaung. Leaving a detach-
ment heavily engaged in this area, the Brigade
effected a double river crossing and occupied
the large village of Kwazon on the 21st Decem-
ber; while another detachment advanced,
against opposition, down the east bank of the
fiver. On the 19th December, 1 Brigade of
82 (West African) Division to the north made
a great stride forward and occupied Kindaung,
forcing the crossing of the Saingdin Chaung.
4 Brigade, released from its protective réle at
Taung Bazaar, was at this time rounding up
scattered enemy parties north of Buthidaung,
preparatory to rejoining the Division in its
advance on Htizwe. After securing Kindaung,
82 (West African) Division encountered stub-
born resistance. A number of attacks failed to
dislodge the enemy rearguards from their
strong hill positions, despite concentrated air
support, On the 22nd December, however, the
enemy was outflanked by a strong force which
moved down the river in boats and seized the
high ground north of Zedidaung against stiff
opposition. From this area, we were able to
overlook the enemy’s line of retreat and his
resistance collapsed. The Kalapanzin Plain,
north of the Saingdin Chaung, had been
cleared of the enemy.

151. On the 27th December, when 74
Brigade had already reached Foul Point, 53
Brigade began their last bound. It entailed
the crossing of the Mayu River (two miles
wide), the capture of Rathedaung, and finally
of Kudaung Island, which was the objective.
This island lies due north of Akyab, in the
junction of the estuaries of the Mayu and
‘Kywede Rivers. One battalion, ferried from
Kwazon to the west bank of the Mayu, drove
-on to Pyinshe (seven miles south of Kwazon),
sweeping prisoners into their net. On the
29th December, they crossed the river to
Utizwe, forestalling the West Africans in the
occupation of this objective. Two days later
‘they occupied Rathedaung unopposed, after it
had been bombarded from tthe sea by the
destroyer NEPAL. On the same day (3i1st
December) another battalion occupied
Kudaupg Island, thus fulfilling the Brigade’s

152. The success of all the foregoing opera-
‘tions of 53 Brigade had been made possible by
the fleet of boats already mentioned. Not only
were they vital for the supply of the Brigade
“but they conferred the tactical mobility which
was so essential. The great effort which they
“had involved was fully justified. The task of
maintenance of the Brigade still remained.
Navigational difficulties were not at an end,
for the lower Mayu is an arm of the sea rather
sthan a river, Great assistance ‘was, at this
stage, rendered by Naval motor launches,
which by the end of the month were able to
stound Foul Point.

1909

153. On the 17th December, 22 (East African)
Brigade began to take over the defence of the
Tunnels area, thereby releasing 51 Brigade to
[mop up a number of bewildered Japanese
detachments, who were garrisoning strongholds
on the Mayu Ridge, by-passed by the advance
of the other two brigades of 25 Indian Division.
By the 22nd December, 51 Brigade began to
spread southwards down ithe coastal plain and
concentrate at Indin, where it remained until
it later rejoined 25 Indian Division in Akyab.
It had taken 25 Indian Division less than three
weeks to secure their final objectives on either
side of the Mayu Range, a fortnight ahead of
schedule. The enemy had withdrawn east to
Kanzauk and a large column was known to
have moved from there to Myohaung. It thus
appeared unlikely that 82 (West African)
Division would encounter much determined
Tesistance on its way into the Kaladan Valley.

154. Earlier, during their advance down the
Kaladan Valley in the Spring of 1944, 81 (West
African) Division bad suffered a check at
Kyauktaw. They were unaccustomed to open
country and Kyauktaw lies in a cultivated
valley four miles south of the confluence of
the Kaladan River and the Pi Chaung. This
time it had been planned to cross the river
north of the confluence and to outflank
Kyauktaw to the east, while leaving a holding
force on the west bank. This would act as a
protective detachment against any counter-
thrust and mislead the enemy as to our inten-
tions. Accordingly, on the 4th December,
6 (West African) Brigade advanced east from
Kyingri on the Pi Chaung, with the intention
of crossing the Kaladan at a point some ten
miles north of the confluence of the two rivers.
The first troops of the Brigade made the
crossing on the 6th December ; by the 9th the
whole of 6 Brigade and Divisional Headquarters
were across, and three days later only a detach-
ment of battalion strength remained west of
the river. Beyond shelling the bridgehead, the
Japanese were slow to react to this crossing
and subsequent concentration, and it was not
until the 15th December that they launched a
night attack against 6 Brigade, which was
covering the bridgehead. This attack was
repulsed after bloody fighting.

155. It should be noted here that the
Japanese had a heavy preponderance in guns ;
81 (West African) Division only possessed pack
artillery, whereas the enemy possessed not only
field but a considerable number of medium
guns. In this close country, air support could
not always redress the balance. In order to
maintain the momentum of our advance,
despite the fact that we were out-gunned, it
was desirable to avoid open fighting. It was
therefore decided to execute a wide hook
through the hills to the east, by-passing
Thayettabin (through which the road runs from
Kyauktaw) and emerging only to cut the
enemy’s communications about Myohaung.

156. The advance from the bridgehead
started on the 19th December and the leading
troops of 6 Brigade, with 5 (West African)
Brigade following, were already eight miles
south-east of Tinma on the following day, with
a major left hook developing. A small decep-
tion detachment was left in the Tinma area for
several days, which successfully diverted the
enemy’s attention from the main outflanking
