SUPPLEMENT to THe LONDON GAZETTE, 12 APRIL, 1951

6. Before explaining my task and the exist-
ing strategical plans, I propose to say a few
words on the topography and climate of Burma,
which exercised a preponderating influence on
all operations there.

The only natural approach to the interior of
Burma is through Rangoon, and thence by
road, rail or river to Mandalay. We, un-
fortunately, had to re-enter the country from
the north, and for this there are only two
routes. The first is from Dimapur (Manipur
Road Railhead), then south through the moun-
tains via Kohima and Imphal, then south-
east through thick jungle hill country to Tamu,
thence south down the notoriously unhealthy
Kabaw Valley to Kalemyo, across the Chind-
win River and then through gradually im-
proving country to Shwebo in the dry belt.
The road from Tamu to Shwebo was only a
fair-weather track quite unsuited as the main
toad artery of an army. The other northern
road approach was via Ledo, and, at the time
we are discussing, it was under construction,
under American control, as a land route to
Myitkyina to link up with the Burma Road.

The only route from the Arakan coast into
Central Burma other than a rough foot track
through An, was a fair-weather road of small
traffic-carrying capacity from Taungup to
Prome. Owing to its situation and limitations
we were not able to use it until after the
capture of Rangoon.

7. Between Eastern Bengal and Central
Burma lie the Lushai and Chin Hills, which
extend south as the Arakan Yomas and north-
east as the barrier between Burma and Assam.
They consist of a mass of parallel sharp ridges,
running roughly north and south, with many
peaks rising to heights of 6,000-9,000 feet. The
highest peak of the Arakan Yomas, Mount
Victoria, is just over 10,000 feet. These moun-
tains are covered with intensely thick jungle
and form a complete military barrier between
Central Burma and the Eastern Bengal and
Arakan coast, with exception of the two tracks
mentioned above.

Tn the centre of Burma, and containing Man-
dalay and Meiktila, lies the “ Dry Belt,” which
consists of flat and open country. It has been
developed, and an all-weather road system
exists, for example, connecting Shwebo, Manda-
lay, Meiktila, Myingyan and Kyaukpadaung.
It was not until we reached this area that we
could expect to fight the Japanese under con-
ditions favourable to our superiority in armour,
fire-power and mobility. The Arakan coast is
discussed in more detail in the part of the
Despatch which deals with the Arakan opera-
tions (Sec. IX). It suffices to say that im-
mensely thick jungle runs down to the coast
from the hills, the only clearings being the
settlements. Suitable beaches for landing
operations are very rare and most of the
water-ways, especially between Akyab and
pauneup. are hemmed in by dense mangrove
forests.

8. The climate of Burma, from an opera-
tional point of view, is dominated by the
arrival of the summer monsoon. The excep-
tionally severe monsoon rains in Arakan
virtually stop all movement by land between
May and the middle of December. Elsewhere
the rainfall is generally very heavy during the
monsoon except in the central dry belt. The
monsoon has the effect, too, of raising a swell

60332

1883

in the Bay of Bengal from mid-March onwards,
until, in early May, days suitable for landing,
operations are very rare indeed. The mon-
soon conditions in the mountainous jungle
areas make land operations difficult and ex-
ceptionally unpleasant, while flying conditions
over them become hazardous in the extreme.

The question of health will be discussed in
detail with the medical aspect in the Adminis-
trative part of this Despatch. It is enough to
say here that without modern methods of main-
taining health, suppressive drugs, and the dis-
cipline required with them, the campaign could
not have been fought.

9. Finally, ‘before leaving the subject of
topography I make no apology for drawing
attention to the huge distances in this theatre.
Our road L. of C. from Kohima to Mandalay
was 527 miles long, and from Mandalay by
road to Rangoon was a further 433 miles.

10. The first task assigned to me in my
Directive was to protect the air route to China,
to open the Burma Road via Myitkyina,
Bhamo and Wanting, to Kunming, and to pro-
tect the airfields at Myitkyina. I was also to
destroy the Japanese Army in Burma, with the.
proviso that these operations must in no way
interfere with my responsibilities for the pro-
tection and opening of the Ledo/Burma Road
and the air routes to China. I realised at once,
however, that I could do nothing permanently
to ensure the safety of the air route or the
Ledo/Burma Road until I had defeated de-
cisively in battle the main Japanese forces in

urma.

11. The strategical plans which I took over
on arrival were as follows.

Operation “Capital” was aimed at the re-
conquest of Central Burma. It envisaged an
advance via Kalewa with Fourteenth Army
into the Mandalay Plain, with the first objective
Ye-U and Shwebo, which are both situated in
the more open country in the dry belt, and,
secondly, ‘Mandalay. Northern Combat
Area Command was to conform in this by ad-
vancing south to the general line Mongmit-
Lashio. The primary object of this operation
was to bring the Japanese to battle in country
where we could exploit our superiority in fire-
power, armour and mobility, and to provide
an “anvil” for the eventual invasion of
Burma from the Rangoon end, since it was
considered that the clearing of Burma from
the north alone was impracticable.

Operation “Dracula” was the invasion
of Rangoon by air and sea. This operation
was originally planned for the middle of
‘March, 1945. While I was in the United King-
dom in early October, after leaving Eighth
Anny, the Chiefs of Staff decided that this
operation could not take place, since the re-
sources, principally in formations which it was
hoped to send from Europe, could not be re-
leased. The original plans envisaged a seven
division operation, including one airborne
division and three air-transported, the re-
mainder for sea assault and follow-up. The
requirements from Europe were two Corps
Headquarters, one airborne division, and three
other divisions, one of which was to replace
the G.H.Q., India, reserve division. Although,
however, it was not going to take place in
the Spring of 1945, it was still intended that a
simifar operation would take place after the

A2
