1892

space to the very adverse effects of the trans-
fer of troops and aircraft from the theatre at
such an inopportune moment, despite the repre-
sentations made by the Supreme Allied
Commander and myself, as at that time it
appeared that the consequences of the re-
duction of Northern Combat Area Command’s

effort might seriously prejudice the whole
success of the operations of Fourteenth Army.
It was, however, agreed by the ‘Chiefs of Staff
that two United States Combat Cargo
squadrons would be returned to South-East
Asia Command by the Ist February, 1945.

54. General Slim’s plan of concentrating the

whole Fourteenth Army in the loop of the
Chindwin and Irrawaddy, as given in para-
graph 32, was based on the belief that the
Japanese would fight to cover Mandalay and
the Shwebo airfields ; that is, that they would
stand west and north of the river. About mid-
December, however, it became apparent that
the enemy was not going to do so and was
withdrawing his main forces southwards. It is
therefore worth while reviewing the enemy’s
situation at this stage.
_ 55, At the end of November, the enemy’s
alignment was as I have described in para-
graph 22. By the 3rd December, however,
we had cross the Chindwin at three points
and held bridgeheads at Sittaung, Mawlaik and
Kalewa. The Japanese, of necessity, had con-
formed to the advance of Fourteenth
Army and Northern Combat Area Com-
mand by withdrawing southwards. The enemy
situation on the 7th December was that 33
Japanese Division held from Gangaw to the
north of Kalewa, with 15 Japanese Division
on its right extended up to the railway above
Wuntho. 31 Japanese Division remained in
the Ye-U area, while 53 Japanese Division
filled the ‘gap between Wuntho and the Irra-
waddy, with 18 Japanese Division on. its right
up to the Bhamo-Namhkam road. 56 Japanese
Division held between Namhkam and the
Salween River. 2 Japanese Division had been
withdrawn from this front and was believed to
be in reserve in Central Burma in. the vicinity
of Pyinmana. Further south, 49 Japanese
Division remained in the Pegu area.

56. By mid-December, the results of our
policy of applying continuous pressure over a
broad front began to be apparent. The enemy
appeared to be readjusting his dispositions as
follows. In 15 Army’s sector, in the north, 53
Japanese Division was crossing the river’ and

positions east of the river; 15
Japanese Division was also withdrawing across
the river into the Mandalay area. 31 Japanese
Division was withdrawing from the Ye-U area
into the strong natural bridgehead, west of the
Irrawaddy, formed by the Sagaing Hills, while
33 Japanese Division was apparently pulling
back to a line running west-south-west from
Myinmu to Pauk, in prolongation of the line
to be held by 31 Division. Pauk was the junc-
tion of 15 Army with 28 Army, which con-
trolled the Irrawaddy Valley. It was known
that 28 Army was building up a strong force
in the Yenangyaung oilfields area comprising
one Independent Mixed Brigade, a part of 49
Japanese Division, and a considerable force of
LN.A. troops.

57. The following points will be noted about
this new positioning of the Japanese forces.
Once the enemy had decided not to fight on

SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 12 APRIL, 1951

the line of the escarpment running through
Pinlebu and Pyingaing he had virtually lost
the battle for the “dry belt” of Central
Burma. The line of the escarpment represented
the last opportunity he had of compelling us
to fight him on a narrow front and on some-
thing approaching level terms. From this line
onwards the country opened out and our
superiority in mobility, firepower and armour.
would increasingly assert itself. There would
be two divisions (the 53rd and 15th) disposed:
in depth east of the Irrawaddy, protecting
Mandalay from the north, with their left flank
protected by the river. The Sagaing Hills
position (31 Division), which the Japanese
had been preparing for some time, would deny
us observation across the river and provide
an outlet for counter-attack. Also, in con-
junction with 33 Japanese Division further
west, it would cover any reserve formations
which the enemy might bring up south and
east of the Irrawaddy.

58. The main reasons which compelled the
enemy to make this alteration in his.plans were
probably three in number. :

First, helped by our air superiority we had
sprung a strategical surprise upon him by the
speed with which we had got strong forces’
across the Chindwin.

Secondly, the troops (15 and 33 Divisions),
with which he had intended to hold a cover-
ing line, had been given no respite during the
monsoon and were thus no longer in a con-
dition seriously to impede our offensive. Re-
sistance to our entry into the Shwebo plain
was crumbling before our rapid advance. We
were now learning gradually just how badly
damaged some of the enemy formations were
from their earlier defeat.

Thirdly, the time and space factor would
not allow the enemy to bring his reserve troops
up from the south. Not only was he short
of transport,, but, -lacking air supremacy, his
movements by day were restricted, and his
lines of communication damaged by bombing.

59. At this point I would like to draw atten-
tion to a factor which will re-appear from
time to time in this Despatch, and that is the
poorness both in quantity and quality of Intelli-
gence about the enemy in the Burma theatre. I
found that, compared with the African and
European theatres, the information which we,
received about the enemy from all sources was
very bad, and we were often virtually fighting
in‘the dark. Although there was a large num-
ber of special and guerrilla organizations, full
benefit was not obtained from these sources
owing to overlapping and the differing channels
by which they reported. Very often little
more operational Intelligence was available
than was obtained from forward troops. I was
very keen to improve this state of affairs as it
made planning extremely difficult, and it did
grow better somewhat later on.

60. General Slim had at once appreciated
that the Japanese had now no intention of
seriously defending the Shwebo Plain, and that
the enemy’s covering forces were virtually
evacuating the river loop, while the main forces
would be grouped in depth, protected by the
great river obstacle. It appeared that the
Japanese intended to fight for Mandalay and
on the line of the Irrawaddy, but it must be
remembered that, at this stage, reports only
