SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 12 APRIL, 1951

possible to land the assault battalions on the
east and west banks of the river. Despite
this, it was decided that the operation should
not be postponed and the magnificent work of
the landing craft crews entirely justified this
decision. Admiral Martin’s signal to the fleet
of “Guts and good seamanship” was an apt
slogan for the occasion. The landings were

successful, the only opposition coming from the:

elements. By 2000 hours the same night, 36
Brigade had reached and crossed the Bassein
Creek. It was on this day that it might be said
that the first element of the Imperial forces re-
entered Rangoon. An R.AF. pilot, after seeing
signals from the ground and a Union Jack
flying over the jail, landed at the airfield seven
miles north of the town. He was greeted by
the local inhabitants, and made his way into
the city and, after contacting our prisoners in
the jail, went down river in a country boat and
gave 26 Indian Division the news. By 2200
hours on the 3rd May, 36 Brigade had occu-
pied Dala Village, opposite the Rangoon
docks, against minor opposition. They had
also crossed the river and entered the dock
area. This was found to have been wrecked by
our bombers, but the only serious damage to
the residential part of the town was to the
water and lighting installations. Meanwhile,
71 Brigade had occupied Syriam, the only
resistance coming from snipers, and were pre-
paring to cross the Pegu River.

263. The liberation of Rangoon had cost
us just under one hundred casualties. Only one
landing craft, unfortunately containing key
engineer and medical personnel, was Jost on a
mine. By the successful re-entry into Rangoon
through the ‘sea-gate, the port was re-opened
at least 14 days earlier than if it had been
left to Fourteenth Army to take from the
north, even as events turned out. The value
of these 14 days at this critical period needs no
emphasis.

264. By the Sth May, the occupation of the
city was complete and exploitation north in
progress. On the following day 26 Indian
Division linked up with Fourteenth Army at
Milestone 29 on the Rangoon—Pegu road,
and the north-south bisection of Burma was
complete, with 18,000 Japanese troops being
cut off to the west. On this date, also, 26
Indian Division passed temporarily under com-
mand of Fourteenth Army and 15 Indian Corps
thus completed its campaign in Burma.

265. With the capture of Rangoon a major
phase of the war against Japan had been com-
pleted, a phase important in itself and decisive
as far as Burma was concerned. It will be to
the eternal credit of the sea, land and air forces
of South-East Asia that this phase was com-
pleted before the 1945 monsoon.

SECTION XV (paras. 266-274) THe NEw
SITUATION
Opening of a new phase: Internal Security
situation: Tactical situation after capture of
Rangoon: The administrative situation and
the effect on future plans.

266. The capture of Rangoon marked the
completion of operation Capital and the end
of a definite phase in the operations in Burma.
From this time onwards I was concerned with
the dual task of finishing off the liberation of

1927

Burma, and at the same time completing pre-
parations for the campaign in Malaya. For
the sake of clarity, I propose to deal first with
our operations in Burma, leaving the plans for
Malaya to a later section of my Despatch.
But it must be remembered that the planning
was in fact being canried out concurrently with
the operations.

267. Before describing the continuance of
operations, one other matter requires mention.
This was the internal security aspect, which
could not now be ignored. Both during the
retreat in 1942 and during the recent advance
large quantities of British and Japanese
arms and ammunition had fallen into the
hands of the civil population. Further-
more, British and American Long-Range
Penetration Brigades, and guerilla organiza-
tions, had armed the northern hill tribes
on a substantial scale. And finally the
Japanese had issued arms to locally raised
forces.

The civil population was therefore in posses-
sion of a large number of weapons, and there
was every chance of a serious outbreak of both
dacoity and communal strife. Indeed, dacoity
had already been met in the Akyab area,
necessitating the detaching of troops to suppress
it.

In January the Burma Government had
taised the question of the reconstitution of the
Burma Army, and I had recommended the
taising of seven infantry battalions in addition -
to those already under my command. The
raising of the first of these was begun in June
but until the end of the period under review
the question of internal security was, as can
be understood, constantly in the minds of
myself and my subordinate Commanders.

268. My main object at this time, early May,
was to complete the liberation of Burma by
the destruction of the remaining enemy forces
in the country. Apart from direct operations
against the Japanese cut off to the west of the
Mandalay—Rangoon corridor, it was necessary
to exert pressure to the east and south, along
the Taunggyi and Mawchi roads, in order that
the maximum advantages could be obtained for
post-monsoon operations. ;

269. Our estimate of the Japanese effective
fighting strength in Burma at this time was
77,000, of which 18,200 were west of the
Irrawaddy. Enemy formations were much
intermingled and disorganized as a result of
their defeats, and it was therefore difficult to
determine accurately their exact groupings.
Their locations, however, were generally known,
and the Japanese Burma Area Army fell into
five main groups. (See Appendix B.)

First, west of the Irrawaddy in ‘the
Thayetmyo area, were 54 Division, 72 Inde-
pendent Mixed Brigade, 153 Regiment from
49 Division and remnants of 112 Regiment of
55 Division.

Second, concentrating in the Pegu Yomas
between the Rivers Irrawaddy and Sittang, was
a considerable but ill-organized force, consist-
ing of H.Q. 28th Japanese Army and Army
troops, 55 Division less 112 Regiment, remnants
of 18, 49 and 53 Japanese Divisions, two
Brigades formed from the original Rangoon
garrison and a number of Lines of Communica-
tion and Base troops. .

Third, 113 Regiment was east of Sittang,
around Taunggyi.
