SUPPLEMENT to tae LONDON GAZETTE, 12 APRIL, 1951

Division continued its sweep south into the
loop of the river against steadily mounting re-
sistance. On the right flank, 20 Indian
Division, advancing from Maukkadaw across
difficult country, captured Budalin on the 10th
January, after four days of the most bitter
fighting. A week later, they were within five
miles of Monywa, which, despite our bombing,
still functioned as the chief Japanese river port
on the Chindwin.

72. In the new 4 Corps sector, Lushai
Brigade crowned its splendid fighting career by
capturing Gangaw on the 12th January after
a month’s serious fighting. The village itself
was entered unopposed after the enemy posi-
tions covering it had been stormed with the aid
of heavy air support. 28 (East African) Brigade
(Brigadier T. H. §. Galletly) then relieved
Lushai Brigade, which was flown out later to
India for rest and refit. While the above opera-
tions were in progress, 7 Indian Division had
begun its advance south. By the 7th January,
it had reached Natchaung, some 12 miles south
of Kalemyo and a hundred miles from its
concentration area at Tamu. It was being
followed by 255 Indian Tank Brigade, which
on this date (7th January) was concentrated
72 miles south of Tamu. The steady advance
southwards on this front was maintained.
Enemy resistance in the Tilin area was quickly
overcome and Tilin itself occupied by 28 (East
African) Brigade on the 22nd January, by
which date Headquarters, 4 Corps, had opened
at Kan.

73. The passage of 4 Corps south to
Pakokku presented considerable engineer prob-
lems. There was an unmetalled track of sorts
from Kalemyo to Pakokku, but it required
widening throughout its length and much
bridging. The only difficult sections were some
rocky hill stretches amounting in all to about
40 miles. The main problems were, first, to
work on a narrow road without impeding the
continuous stream of traffic which flowed
throughout the 24 hours and, secondly, the
movement of engineer units and equipment
forward in the limited amount of transport that
was available, and their maintenance.
general the plan adopted was that the divi-
sional engineers worked forward bringing the
track up to a standard to carry three-tonners
and Corps engineers followed making it pas-
sable for heavy lorries and transporters, includ-
ing construction of the water crossings.
Although the policy was that this road would
be abandoned after the passage of 4 Corps’ it
was in fact kept open as a subsidiary L. of C.
until the Inland Water Transport link from
Kalewa to Myingyan was in operation.
Nevertheless it was a rough passage to travel
by this route and drivers who had experienced
the Kabaw Valley during the monsoon were
unanimously of the opinion that they would
rather drive through two feet of mud than
three feet of dust. The latter, between Tilin

* and Pauk, on occasions proved to be a barrier
even to the usually ubiquitous jeep. It is worth
remarking, none the less, that the original plan
of moving 4 Corps up over the route taken
by 19 Indian Division would have been far
more difficult and, with the engineer resources
at our disposal, would have probably been
impracticable.

74.7 Yndian Division was not to be
thwarted by any of the difficulties described

1895

above. While work on the road was in pro-
gress, 89 Brigade, operating in two columns,
executed a skilful flanking movement through
the hills, which forced the enemy to vacate
their strong positions covering Pauk on the
27th January. By the 3ist January, 7 Indian
Division was seven miles east of Pyinchaung,
after forcing the double crossing of the Yaw
Chaung against unexpectedly light opposition.
28 (East African) Brigade was operating to the
south, covering the right flank of the Corps.
75. On the 8th February, the joint Four-
teenth Army/221 Group R.A.F. Headquarters
opened at Monywa. This now included the
Rear Headquarters, 221 Group, which had been
left behind at Imphal when Army Headquar-
ters moved forward, only a small operations
staff then accompanying the Army Head-
quarters. 221 Group Headquarters, under Air
Vice-Marshal §. F. Vincent, and Headquarters
Fourteenth Army maintained a joint Head-
quarters for the remainder of the campaign.

76. It was now becoming operationally essen-
tial to bring up more formations. To do so
involved administrative risk, but we could now
look forward to some improvement in the
transport aircraft situation after the 1st Febru-
ary and a further large improvement on the
Ist March. By the end of January, therefore,
17 Indian Division was concentrated forward
in the Gangaw Valley, together with 255
Indian Tank Brigade, as already mentioned.
I also told General Slim that he could bring
forward 5 Indian Division, which had been
reorganized like 17 Indian Division, when he
required it.

71, The distance between 19 Indian Divi-
sion’s bridgehead at Thabeikkyin, to the
projected 4 Corps’ crossing in the vicinity of
Pakokku is some 160 miles. Between
Thabeikkyin and the other 19 Indian Divi-
sional bridgehead at Kyaukmyaung—about 24
miles—the river flows through jungle-clad hills
and is comparatively narrow, being some 500
yards wide. From Kyaukmyaung downstream,
the country opens out and the width of the
river varies from 2,000 yards to 4,500 yards
at its junction with the Chindwin (between
Myingyan and Pakokku). The current in the

ry season is about two knots in the

wider stretches, but navigation is obstructed
by islands and sandbanks. Generally speaking,
the south bank dominates the northern
approaches, but this does not apply to the loop,
where the Sagaing Hills (which the Japanese
were careful to hold) on the north bank
dominate not only the river to the east and
south, but all approaches to it from the north.
I would sum up my impressions of this wide
and treacherous river by saying that I cannot
imagine a more formidable military water
obstacle.

78. Our primary object in the north was to
divert attention from the projected 4 Corps”
crossing near Pakokku. To achieve this, the
first crossings, as already stated, had been made
by 19 Indian Division on the extreme left flank
of Fourteenth Army. This, it was hoped,
together with the deception measures we were
employing, would lead the enemy to appreciate.
that the rest of 4 Corps would follow 19 Indian
Division, and that our main effort from there
would be directed on Mandalay. This illusion
would be strengthened by the steady advance
of 36 British Division from the north. The
