1902

actions which resulted amounted to pure
slaughter. The enemy, caught completely on
the wrong foot, was engaged by aircraft, tanks
and infantry and thrown into utter confusion.
Here again, the “Cab Rank” method proved
most efficacious.

109, To say that our capture of Meiktila
came as a surprise to the enemy Command
would be an understatement. Not only was
the blow utterly unexpected, but their Intelli-
gence was for some time completely baffied
as to what troops had inflicted it. The general
counter-offensive plans for early March had to
to put aside, as, until Meiktila was recaptured
and our forces south of Mandalay destroyed,
no major attacks could be launched north
and west of the Irrawaddy. On the other
hand, failure to recapture Meiktila could result
in disaster for practically the whole of the
Burma Area Army. Although captured orders
show that Kimura realised this, yet, curiously
enough, other documents show that he still
intended to prosecute what he called “The
decisive battle of the Irrawaddy Shore.” The
result was that he adopted half-measures. He
countermanded the moves directed against
33 Conps {vide paragraph 95) and diverted
these formations on to Meiktila, stressing, in
his orders, the vital necessity for speed. He
also directed General Yamamoto in the west
(Yenangyaung area) to sever 4 Corps’ commu-
nications by capturing their Pakokku bridge-
head by an advance up both banks of the
Irrawaddy. But he gave no orders to his forces
who were about Mandalay or south of the
river to withdraw, evidently considering he
could restore the situation about Meiktila while
continuing the battle in the north. Here, as
so often before, the Japanese under-estimation
of their enemy was to prove fatal to them.

110. The forces which Kimura concentrated
to recover Meiktila were as follows: 18
Japanese Division (less 114 Regiment), brought
south from the Northern Combat Area Com-
mand’s front: 119 Regiment (53 Japanese Divi-
sion), from south of Mandalay ; 214 Regiment
(33 Japanese Division) from the Irrawaddy
front, opposite Pakokku; and 49 Japanese
Division (less 153 Regiment) which had been
hurried north from Pegu. These forces were
reinforced by Army Troops, including medium
artillery and some tanks. It was a formidable
concentration and it was being rapidly effected.
Our forces in Meiktila comprised 17 Indian
Division and one tank brigade. The only re-
inforcement available was 5 Indian Division,
which moved forward from Jorhat (700 miles
distant) on the Sth March. Its forward con-
centration was carried out with great speed and
the whole Division (less its air-transportable
brigade) had reached 7 Indian Division’s
bridgehead at Nyaungu 10 days later. The
fly-in of the remaining brigade from Palel to
Meiktila was completed on the 17th March,
but I will refer to this again. It will be seen,
therefore, that the enemy was concentrating the
equivalent of six brigades, plus Army units,
against our four infantry brigades and one
tank brigade. There was nothing perturbing
about this, but it must be remembered that our
communications were vulnerable ; our forward
airfields were exposed to attack, as, also, was
the road back via Taungtha, while the road
west, via Kyaukpadaung, was of course still

SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 12 APRIL, 1951

under enemy control. Our object, therefore,
was to hold Meiktila, acting as offensively as
possible, while 7 Indian Division kept open
the bridgehead area and enabled 5 Indian
Division to pass through.

111. As already stated (paragraph 109), the
enemy commander at Yenangyaung had been
ordered to seize our bridgehead at Nyaungu,
thus cutting our L. of C. to Meiktila. Yama-
moto’s plan was to make a converging attack
from the west, on the right bank, and from
the south and east on the left bank. This
offensive, however, was uncoordinated. The
IN.A. Division attempted an assault from the
east against 114 Brigade in the bridgehead, but
its attacks were half-hearted and were driven
back with heavy casualties. To the south, a
Japanese force, assembling for an attack near
Singu four miles north-east of Chauk, was
caught and routed by 89 Brigade. The attack
on the bridgehead from the west was pre-
vented from developing by 28 (East African)
Brigade, which successfully repulsed a series of
attacks. Thus ended the threat to our com-
munications at Nyaungu.

112. 28 (Bast African) Brigade deserves
some remarks. Besides 11 (East African) Divi-
sion, the original East African contingent in-
cluded two independent brigades, the 22nd and
the 28th, which were originally allotted for
defence duties in Ceylon. Shortage of forma-
tions, however, had resulted in both brigades
being sent to Burma, primarily to undertake
duties on the L. of C. The Commander, Four-
teenth Army, soon found himself forced,
through lack of sufficient troops, to employ
28 (East African) Brigade in the line, although
the formation had not really reached a suffi-
ciently advanced state of training to be pitted
against the enemy. It will be remembered
that a reverse was suffered resulting in a with-
drawal to the Letse area. Reinforced, how-
ever, by an Indian battalion and some artil-
lery, the Brigade fought well, as shown above.
In accordance with the decisions reached at
a Conference with the G.O.C.-in-C., East
Africa, held in February, 28 (East African)
Brigade was flown out of Burma to Dohazari
in March and April, and broken up, as the first
step in the reduction of the East African forces,
which, owing to the man-power situation, were
to be reduced to the one division by early 1946.

113. On the east flank of the Irrawaddy
battlefront, over a 100 miles up river, another
great battle was raging. 19 Indian Division,
which had broken out of its bridgehead on the
20th February, had begun its drive down the
east bank of the river, advancing with great
speed and determination. The two Japanese
divisions (the 15th and 53rd) opposing 19
Indian Division completely failed to stop it.
Strong positions were either assaulted, with
tank and air support, or were by-passed. In a
“Jeap-frogging ” advance, 98 Brigade were the
first troops to reach the Chaungmagyi, estab-
lishing a bridgehead on the 5th March ; while,
further north, 64 Brigade was still mopping up
in the Pinlein area and 62 Brigade was fighting
at Yenatha, which they captured on the 6th.
The result of this method of advance was that
we reached and passed through Madaya before
the enemy had time to retire to the strongly
prepared positions covering the two water
barriers north of the town. This spectacular
