1926

gain this coveted prize. Their progress was
barred by mines averaging 130 to every mile
of road, demolitions and, last but not least,
mud. By the afternoon of the 3rd May, when
17 Indian Division was still 32 miles from the
city and held up by a flooded chaung, Ran-
goon ‘was being entered by 15 Indian Corps.
4 Corps had been frustrated, not by the Japan-
ese, but by the elements. In their advance
from Pyawbwe they had covered 260 miles in
20 days. Although they did not actually
liberate its capital, the reconquest of Burma
was in the main effected by Fourteenth Army,
an to them Jargely belongs the honour and
ory.

SECTION XIV (paras. 257-265) THE CAPTURE
OF RANGOON
The plan for the seaborne operation against
Rangoon: The airborne operation: Rangoon
discovered virtually abandoned: The link-up
with Fourteenth Army.

257. While Fourteenth Army were thrust-
ing south, the planning of the seaborne inva-
sion of Rangoon was proceeding. It will be

remembered that, as stated at the beginning of |

this Despatch, when the various projects were
discussed, how considerable an operation this
invasion in its original form was to have been.
It was now proposed to carry it out on a very
much smaller scale, but the inherent diffi-
culties of the operation remained the same,
with the exception that the weather conditions
would be a great deal worse than at the time
of year originally contemplated for this opera-
tion.

258. In preparing the plan for a seaborne
assault on Rangoon, the first consideration was
the clearance of the Rangoon River and its
channel, to permit the approach of major Jand-
ing craft. Throughout its whole length of 24
miles it had been mined both by the Japanese
and by our own minelaying aircraft. Since
minesweepers could only work with the flow
of the tide, it was estimated that they would re-
quire four days to complete their task. Before
minesweepers or major landing craft could
enter the river, the coastal defences on the west
bank, especially those at Elephant Point,
would have to be eliminated. Owing to the
difficulties of approach to the mouth of the
tiver, it was not practicable to neutralise these
by’ fire nor was a sea landing on the Point
itself possible at this time of year. The only
solution was to seize Elephant Point by an air-
borne operation, so as to allow the sweeping
of the entrance to the river and the approach
of major landing craft. In any case a very
long run-in for minor landing craft was in-
volved, about 24 miles. On the east bank,
the village of Kyauktan and the town of Syriam
on the Pegu River were both believed to be
garrisoned, the latter being held in. strength.
Thus it was apparent that preliminary opera-
tions, probably extending over several days,
would be necessary before Rangoon itself
could be attacked.

259. The plan in broad outline was as follows.
15 Indian Corps was to consist of 26 Indian
Division, now at Ramree, as assault division,
with 2 British Division, which had been with-
drawn into the Calcutta area, as follow up.
The airborne operation was to consist of a
parachute battalion dropped on the Ist May,

SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 12 APRIL, 1951

west of Elephant Point, with’ the task of
destroying the defences in that area. This
would permit the entrance of minesweepers
which would sweep a channel up the river as
far as its junction with the Bassein Creek at
Thakutpin, some twelve miles from Elephant
Point. The way being thus opened for the first
flight of assault troops, 36 Brigade of 26
Indian Division was to land half-way between
Elephant Point and the Bassein Creek
on the 2nd May (D-Day). Simultaneously
with the landing of 36 Brigade, one
battalion of 71 Brigade was to land on
the east bank, near the mouth of the
Hmawwun Chaung, and exploit towards
Kyauktan. The remainder of 71 Brigade was
to build up this bridgehead as landing craft
became available, followed by 4 Brigade. These
two Brigades, after capturing Kyauktan, were
to drive northwards to the outskirts of Syriam.
On D plus 9, 6 Brigade of 2 British Division
would take over the area from 71 Brigade,
thus releasing 71 and 4 Brigades for the cap-
ture of Syriam and the clearance of the
southern bank of the Pegu River. The re-
maining two brigades of 2 British Division
were to follow up and assault Rangoon.

260. One of the main difficulties was the
shortness of time available for preparing for
this operation. The greater part of the Para-
chute Brigade was on leave and so an impro-
vised Gurkha battalion had to be got together
for the operation. It was very much to the
credit of the Indian Airborne Division that this
was efficiently organized and the operation
carried out up to time. The consideration
which limited the size of the airborne
operation was the available air-lift. To
find enough aircraft to lift the battalion,
the two American Air Commandos had
to be taken from 4 Corps. At the same
time we could afford no reduction in air supply
lift and so pilots had to be called on to fly at
very high rates during this period, a call to
which they, needless to say, responded mag-
nificently. Finally, it will be remembered that
2 British, Division had been flown out of Burma
into India. To take part in this operation it
had to be re-equipped. This was done by
G.H.Q. India, in what must have been record
time, brigades being re-equipped in turn with-
in seven to ten days of their arrival, and
although the whole Division was not in the end
used, the first brigade embarked to schedule.

261. On the 1st May, heavy air attacks were
made on all knowa defences on both banks of
the Rangoon River and the Parachute Batta-
lion was dropped successfully at 0630 hours.
They captured Elephant Point practically un-
opposed. It was only now that we received
the first indication that the Japanese had vir-
tually abandoned Rangoon. Aircraft reported
the message “ Japs gone” painted on the roof
of the Rangoon jail, which was known to be
a prisoner of war camp.

262. By the 2nd May, the invasion fleet had
been successfully and correctly assembled—
no mean task—and Jay off the river estuary
on the agreed lowering position, which as 1
have said before was a considerable distance
from the beaches. The weather, however,
before dawn on D-Day was extremely bad with
high seas, low cloud and drenching rain, and
the Naval Commander (Rear-Admiral Martin)
predicted odds of three to one against it being
