SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 12 APRIL, 1951

SECTION XXIII (paras. 366-371) PLANS FOR
DEVELOPING RANGOON

Assembly of Force Commanders: The split-
ting of the reconnaissance party: The alterna-
tive convoy plan.

366. Experience in Africa and Europe had
shown repeatedly the importance of really good
planning and organization where the reopening
of a captured port was concerned. In the case
of Rangoon we were more than ever working
against time, since the monsoon was almost on
us and it was essential to relieve the air trans-
port system of the heavy load it was carrying,
as this load was being canried partly at the
expense of aircraft serviceability.

367. The project for the reopening of Ran-
goon and the development of the Advanced
Base was known as operation “Stanza.” An
administrative appreciation was [prepared at
my Headquarters and in March it was handed
over to the Commander, No. 1 Area, South-East
Asia Command, who had been designated for
the Rangoon Advanced Base Area. The
Advanced Base Commanders of all three Ser-
vices together with essential staff had been
assembled in Calcutta. Jt was agreed that
planning should be co-ordinated by the Army,
in the person of the Commander, No. 1 Area,
as Rangoon was from the administrative angle
predominantly the Army’s concern.

368. When it was decided that a seaborne
expedition would be put in to assist Four-
teenth Anmy in their advance to Rangoon
new complications arose, In all plans for the
development of a port and advanced base it is
essential that the reconnaissance party gets in
immediately after the place is captured. But
in this particular instance it was going to be
impossible until a few days before the event
to forecast whether Fourteenth Army or 15
Indian Conps would enter Rangoon first. There
was a strong possibility that either formation
might be held up short of the city itself while
the other got in from the opposite direction,
and that the occupation of the city by one
would not necessarily open the way at once for
the other. If the reconnaissance party was com-
mitted with what turned out to be the wrong
formation, it might not be able to function dur-
ing the first few vital days following the fall
of the city, which would inevitably result in
dislocation of the rehabilitation plans.

369. It was therefore decided to split the
Tecomnaissance party into three groups. First
there was the Road Party. This was the main
reconnaissance party and consisted of such staff
and administrative services as would be needed
to carry out the detailed reconnaissance for
depots, etc. Its task was to organize the open-
ing of the port as soon as the first ships arrived.
This party left Calcutta early in April and,
travelling by road via Manipur Road and
Jmphal, succeeded in catching up 4 Corps in
time to enter Rangoon with them from the
north, after the link-up with 15 Indian Corps
had been effected.

370. The second group of the reconnaissance
party was the Sea Party. This was envisaged
as the substitute for the Road Party, and its
composition was sufficiently strong to enable it
by itself, to carry out the same tasks. It was
held in readiness to go in with one of 15 Indian

60332

1945

Corps’ convoys as soon as it was clear that the
fall of the city was imminent. Finally, there
was the Air Party, consisting of the three Ser-
vice Advanced Base Commanders each with his
senior staff officer. This party remained behind
to complete the final details, and then was
flown an as soon as the Rangoon airfield
(Mingaladon) was clear.

371. The second main problem which arose
was how advantage could be taken of an early
fall of the city. If 15 Indian Corps met heavy
opposition—and it had to be assumed that
it would—build-up convoys, including the
follow-up division would be required. If the
city fell quickly or if it fell to Fourteenth Army,
the most urgent requirements were all the units
and stores for the quick development of the
Advanced Base. It was therefore essential to
have a Stanza (Advanced Base Development)
convoy, containing the necessary transportation
and engineer stores, together with the units,
for the immediate reopening of Rangoon Port,
ready to replace one of the later Dracula opera-
tional convoys, should it be found possible to
reduce or defer the Dracula build-up. This
naturally involved considerable manipulation of
the shipping and stores concentration pro-
grammes; but this Stanza convoy was suc-
cessfully prepared, and did in the event go in on
D plus 21 in place of one of the later Dracula
convoys.

SECTION XXIV (paras. 372-393)
AIRFIELD CONSTRUCTION

The organization of Air Forces: The air-
field engineer organization: Work on Base
airfields, airfields for air supply and the
China lift: Forward airfield construction:
Fourteenth Army’s advance: Airfields in
Arakan: The development of Akyab and
Kyaukpyu.

372. The airfield construction work carried
out under the control of my Headquarters was
so extensive and varied that it deserves treat-
ment in a section to itself. This operational
commitment of the Army has proved to be
a major factor, both strategic and administra-
tive, in any theatre of war. In such an un-
developed theatre as South-East Asia, where
air transport was used on an unprecedented
scale the commitment was correspondingly
even greater.

373. The presence in the theatre of both
British, including Dominion, and United States
Air Forces with widely varying functions re-
sulted in a highly complicated organization.
Until the end of November, 1944, Fourteenth
Army was supported by 3 Tactical Air Force,
and the Headquarters of both formations were
at Comilla. When 15 Indian Corps was sepa-
tated from Fourteenth Army and came under
my direct command, the R.A.F. Groups with
these formations (221 Group with Fourteenth
Amy, 224 Group with 15 Indian Corps),
became in effect separate tactical air forces. At
the same time 3 Tactical Air Force ceased
to exist as such, its operational echelon being
merged into Headquarters, Eastern Air Com-
mand (which, as I have mentioned before,
was an integrated operational Headquarters
formed from Headquarters, US.AAF,,
India/Burma Theatre and elements from Air

E
