1908

cleared. When 1 Brigade was firmly estab-
lished, 4 Brigade was to drive down towards
it from Taung Bazaar. Subsequently, when the
whole Buthidaung area had been cleared, 82
(West African) Division, less one brigade left
for rear protection, was to advance through
Kindaung on Htizwe. The rate of advance
was to be co-ordinated with 53 Brigade to
ensure that the Divisional task of protecting
the Corps’ eastern flank was effectively carried.
out. From Htizwe, 82 (West African) Division
was to cross the Kanzauk Pass into the Kaladan
Valley, relieve 81 (West African) Division north
of Myohaung, and then to continue the
advance south.

142, The 11th December saw 74 Brigade of
25 Indian Division beginning its advance in the
coastal sector—a flying start in order to attract
the enemy’s attention away from the Buthi-
daung area. On the 12th December, 51
Brigade extended its hold east towards
Buthidaung against slight opposition. By the
14th December, 53 Brigade had concentrated
in the eastern foothills of the Mayu Range,
four miles south of Letwedet. Forward
elements of 82 (West African) Division had
debouched from the Tunnels, passed through
51 Brigade, and had reached Buthidaung and
Baguna. By the 15th December, 2 (West
African) Brigade had secured Buthidaung and
cleared it of the enemy, and 82 (West African)
Division had secured its first objectives. The
advance of 15 Indian Corps was thus success-
fully launched on both the 25th and 82nd
Divisional fronts.

143. Further east, in the Kaladan Valley,
the main body of 81 (West African) Divi-
sion had crossed the Kaladan River by the 12th
December, while on the west side of the river
a detachment attacked and drove the enemy
from positions south of Kinthe {14 miles south
of Kaladan Village). The crossing of the
Kaladan is described in more detail in para-
graph 154 below. The West Africans had
carried out a highly successful advance against
opposition, covering 50 miles in 42 days. This
rate of advance may not sound very rapid,
but it was achieved through extremely dense
and difficult country. There is no doubt that
its speed took the Japanese by surprise and
forced them to withdraw southward, abandon-
ing areas which they had intended to hold,
but which were now outflanked

144. A significant report was received about
this time (mid-December) stating that the
Japanese had started to improve the track
over the An Pass, leading westwards from
Minbu on the Irrawaddy, to Dalet, on the west
coast. This route was obviously intended to
provide interior lines of supply from the middle
Irrawaddy to the Arakan coast, or else a
means of withdrawal in the reverse direction.
The only other practicable route lay much
further south, a fair-weather road from
Taungup inland to Prome.

145. In the early stages of the advance of
25 Indian Division, the enemy were amply
in evidence in the hills, but they were so
rapidly outflanked that only on one occasion
did they succeed in launching an attack on
the advancing column. This was repulsed with
heavy loss to the attackers. What did happen
however, was that the Japanese on more than
one occasion attacked areas in our rear which

SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 12 APRIL, 1951

were devoid of troops. The enemy shelling
did nothing to impede our advance; more-
over it proved somewhat profitable, since ruth-
less counter-battery action was invariably
forthcoming from the watchful destroyers
NAPIER and NEPAL lying off the coast,
which also, on occasions, even dispersed
enemy detachments attempting to destroy
bridges on the line of our advance. By the

th December, 74 Brigade of 25 Indian
Division had already covered half the distance
from Maungdaw to Foul Point.

146. On the 19th December, the Navy turned
their attention to a strategical target and the
NAPIER shelled the town of Rathedaung, east
of the Mayu Range and on the far bank of
the Mayu River, which was the Headquarters
of the Japanese “Sakura Detached Force.”
Their fire was controlled by an Army Air
Observation Post and the incident constituted
an innovation in inter-Service liaison in this
theatre. The results were most satisfactory.
Indin Village was occupied on the 21st and
its airstrip was soon in commission. In country
where operational airfields were not easy to
construct, this acquisition proved of great
value in subsequent operations. 74 Brigade’s
next bound was to Dombaik, the scene of the
battle of early 1943. The enemy had recently
improved this strong position, and it might
have provided us with a problem. But the
Japanese had been left far in the rear and the
defile was occupied on the 23rd December
before the enemy could get any garrison back
to man their defences. They did, however,
cut in behind our troops, but our advance
continued unchecked. The incident merely
served to illustrate once again the importance
of sea power ; had we been dependent on sup-
plies by road, this severance of land communi-
cations could not have been thus ignored. As
it was, the Brigade was effectively maintained
by Naval landing craft and the I.W.T.

147. 74 Brigade reached Foul Point, at the
tip of the Mayu Peninsula, on the 26th Decem-
ber, after an advance of 30 miles in 14 days,
and by the 27th December, the dominating hill
features in the neighbourhood were in our
possession. This opened the mouths of the
Mayu and Kywede Rivers for the operations
of light Naval craft and for sea-borne main-
tenance. The whole of the south of the penin-
sula was reported clear of the enemy and the
Brigade began to concentrate for future
operations.

148. While 74 Brigade had been making
rapid progress in the coastal sector, 53 Brigade
had been advancing east of the spine with
82 (West African) Division, moving down the
axis of the Mayu River. Some determined
tesistance from enemy covering positions had
been encountered and, in addition, 82 (West
African) Division had ibeen impeded by adverse
tidal conditions at major river crossings. After
the occupation of Buthidaung and Baguna
(paragraph 142) 82 (West African) Division
began an opposed crossing of the Kalapanzin
River. The following day, a second surprise
crossing was effected a few miles further south,
‘but the enemy held grimly to the foothills over-
looking the road and the advance was checked.

149. While these operations were in progress,
the immense task of assembling and launching
the large fleet of boats on the Kalapanzin River
