1900

97. The bringing forward of 17 and 5 Indian
Divisions, which had been made possible by
the increase in transport aircraft promised by
the Ist March (vide paragraphs 69 and 93), had
raised the number of divisions in Fourteenth
Army to six. Had the Japanese redistribution
of their forces, mentioned above, been effected
in full, it would have meant that their total
strength opposed to Fourteenth Army would
have been increased by the equivalent of three
divisions, i.e., up to a total of eight divisions
(less one regiment), excluding the two I.N.A.
divisions. In view of this disparity in forma-
tions, General Slim asked that 36 British
Division should be placed under his command.
I was, however, unable to accede to this
request at this juncture (though I was in a posi-
tion to do so later), both because it would have
upset_the Northern Combat Area d
plan and also because of administrative difficul-
ties connected with air supply. It will be
remembered that I had already instructed
General Sultan to accelerate his advance and
co-operate in the coming Mandalay battle
(vide paragraph 92). But while, on paper, I
had apparently ordered six divisions to destroy
a force of nearly eight, there were several fac-
tors, which have been mentioned before,
operating in our favour. We were now
beginning to realise how far the state of the
enemy was deteriorating. We had overwhelm-
ing air superiority and all the great advantages
of security from air attack, close air support,
regular air reconnaissance, air supply and air
movement of troops—advantages which were
denied to the Japanese, owing to their marked
inferiority in the air. We possessed great
advantages in mobility and in armoured
strength, and were in terrain where we could
exploit them. And, last but not least, there
was the proved fighting value of our own
troops and their now most marked moral
ascendency over the enemy.

98. In 33 Corps’ sector, 19 Indian Division
made substantial gains in the third week in
February, capturing Singu after stiff fighting
and inflicting heavy casualties. On 98 Brigade’s
front, there were indications that the enemy
was pulling out from the Thabeikkyin area,
after ten days of continuous attacks. 98 Brigade
was, therefore, ordered to clear the area between
Thaibeikkyin and the southern bridgehead
and rejoin the remainder of the Division. This
operation was successfully completed by the
20th February, on which date 19 Indian
Division commenced its drive south on a two
brigade front against continued resistance. 2
British Division encountered only light opposi-
tion to their build-up, as the enemy in this
sector had concentrated his strength in an
all-out effort to destroy 20 Indian Division.
In 20 Indian Division’s bridgehead, a prolonged
and bitter struggle was raging, but the
Japanese, following their usual custom, flung
their reinforcements in piecemeal and their
casualties continued to mount. By the 16th
February, we had passed to the offensive, cap-
turing Alethaung Village after savage hand-to-
hand fighting. Fierce counter-attacks followed
against the extreme west of our position ; but,
by the 26th we had taken Tabingon and ex-
tended our bridgehead to a width of eight miles
and a depth of two and a half.

99. In 4 Corps’ sector, after the capture of
Pagan on the 15th February already recorded,

SUPPLEMENT To tae LONDON GAZETTE, 12 APRIL, 1951

7 Indian Division’s bridgehead at Nyaungu was
considerably enlarged. By the end of February,
33 Brigade was thrusting east, along the
south bank of the Irrawaddy, with Myingyan
as its ultimate objective. Meanwhile, 89
Brigade was striking south towards Singu. On
the north bank, 114 Brigade continued opera-
tions about Pakokku. On the right flank of 4
Corps, west of the river, 28 (East African)
Brigade had repulsed enemy attacks south of
Letse. Further west, a detachment composed
of the Chin Hills Battalion and the Lushai
Scouts was pushing back the Japanese rear
parties in the area of Point 468, west-north-
west of Letse. As already stated (paragraph
87) 17 Indian Division (less its air-transportable
brigade) and 255 Indian Tank Brigade,
had concentrated in 7 Indian Division’s
bridgehead at Nyaungu by the 22nd February.
The success or failure of the whole Fourteenth
Army plan depended on its subsequent opera-
tions and they will be described separately.

100. On the Northern Combat Area Com-
mand front 36 British Division (less 29
Brigade), advancing on Mongmit from the
north, effected a strongly opposed crossing of
the Shweli River during the first week of
February. The first attempt failed, but the
second one, made with increased air support,
was successful near the bend of the river north
of Myitson. Myitson fell on the 9th February
and the advance continued against stiff
resistance. On the 17th, the enemy counter-
attacked in strength, using flame-throwers and
rouch artillery. They succeeded in penetrat-
ing our forward positions, but were ejected by
a Spirited attack by an Indian battalion
after bitter hand-to-hand fighting. Our
further progress towards Mongmit continued to
meet with determined resistance. 29
Brigade, advancing on Mongmit from the west,
captured Nabu on the 18th February and, by
the end of the month, had reached a point
approximately half way between Nabu and
Mongmit, Further east, 50 Chinese Division
entered Namtu on the 23rd February, captur-
ing eleven locomotives and a quantity of
tolling stock. Further east again, 30 Chinese
Division captured Hsenwi on the night 18th—
19th February against light opposition. This
village lies on the Burma Road about 30 miles
north-east of Lashio. The enemy in this
sector appeared to be falling back to posi-
tions immediately north of Lashio, with a view
to defending that town.

101. Although the Japanese were withdraw-
ing along the whole of Northern Combat Area
Command’s front, they were doing so at their
leisure. Since the weakening of Northen
Combat Area Command’s front by the loss
of two divisions and the securing of the road
trace through Namhkam and Muse by the
capture of Hsenwi, the pressure had slackened
and this front was not fulfilling the task I
wanted done, namely the containing of the
Japanese forces there and the prevention of
enemy concentration against Fourteenth
Army. it was for this reason that, in my
Operation Instruction of the 27th February (see
Appendix A), I directed the Commanding
General, Northern Combat Area Command, to
secure the general area Kyaukme—Lashio with
all speed.
