SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 12 APRIL, 195!

Directive issued by the Supreme Allied Com-
mander on the 3rd December, 1944, he in-
structed his Commanders-in-Chief to plan an
operation for the capture of the Hastings Har-
bour Island Group, which lies off Victoria
Point, the southern tip of Burma. The object
of the operation was to establish an advanced
naval and air base for the exploitation of our
naval and air superiority, to assist operations
in Burma and to prepare for an early advance
on Malaya. I represented to the Supreme
Allied Commander that we had insufficient
force to do this operation in addition to the
Arakan and Fourteenth Army operations, and
planning was suspended.

18. I have already mentioned in paragraph

11 that a number of formations were due from
Europe, but that this redeployment had been
postponed. Two aspects of this deserve men-
tion at once as they were problems which
remained during the whole period on which
I am reporting.

The first problem was the lack of sufficient
formations with which to affect the relief of
battle-worn troops. General Giffard, with the
help of the Commander-in-Chief, India, had
done much to improve the situation, but it was
still acute. It was only possible to spare one
division at a time for rehabilitation in India.
Moreover, the time and space factor, including
the limited number of transport aircraft avail-
able in the theatre made this process necessarily
slow. To send a division from Burma to India,
from the point of view of time and availability,
was equivalent to moving such a formation
from Italy to rest and refit in Palestine. Further,
I could not afford to send more than one
division outside the Fourteenth Army area.
Reorganizations for specific tasks and reliefs
were achieved by resting formations within the
Army area. But most of the formations under
my command had been in forward areas for six
months—some much longer. Lack of trained
reinforcements, especially in British personnel,
made it difficult to keep some of them up to
full establishment.

The second problem concerned the redeploy-
ment of formations from Europe. This scheme,
known as “Minerva,” involved the large-
scale transfer of formations, units and cadres
initially to the command of General Head-
quarters, India, for subsequent employment in
operations in S.E.A.C. Although it was not
implemented to any extent during the period
covered by this Despatch, it was a matter under
very active consideration the whole time. The
principal difficulty was the time lag. In the
case of an Indian division in Italy, it would
be eight and a half months from the time the
order to withdraw from Italy was given to the
date of readiness for operations in S.E.A.C.:
for a British division from North-West
Europe the corresponding delay was eight
months. Moreover, the formations could not
at this stage be linked up with a particular
projected future operation but had to build up
a balanced force suitable for any future opera-
tions in the theatre. The composition of the
force table and the necessary priority of arrival
in India were matters of close co-operation
between General Headquarters, India, and my
Headquarters.

1885

Section II (paras. 19-27) THE OPERATIONAL
SITUATION IN NOVEMBER

The failure of the Japanese invasion of
Spring, 1944: The importance of the 1944 mon-
soon operations: The state of the enemy, his
strength and dispositions: Relative strengths:
Our assets of sea and air power: Air supply.

19. In February and March, 1944, Fourteenth
Army (15 Corps) had decisively beaten the
Japanese in Arakan. This was followed by our
outstanding victory in the Kohima—Imphal
battle (May-July). Thus the offensive, which
the Japanese had launched in the Spring with
the object of seizing the gateway to India, had
completely failed. They had suffered tre-
mendous casualties, estimated at 100,000 during
their offensive and their subsequent retreat

during the monsoon, when privation and ex-'

posure took a toll to which the thousands of
enemy bodies counted by our advancing troops
bore witness.

20. During the monsoon, Fourteenth Army
and Northern Combat Area Command both
exploited success to the full. I wish to em-
phasise the importance of these monsoon
operations. In the Kohima—lImphal battle we
had inflicted a crushing defeat on the enemy
and our continuous pressure throughout the
rainy season had kept him on the run, allow-
ing him no respite. This was largely due to

the tenacity of 5 Indian Division (Major-

General D. F. W. Warren) and of 11 (East
African) Division (Major-General C. C.
Fowkes) which refused to be daunted by
appalling conditions of weather and terrain.

21. My problem, which was largely an admin-
istrative one owing to the paucity of communi-
cations, was how to maintain the impetus of
our advance until we could bring the enemy
to battle on ground of our own choosing. More-
over, to be fully effective, this impetus had
to be maintained over a broad front. It
appeared likely that the enemy, having failed
to stop us west of the Chindwin, would attempt
to hold the Shwebo—Mandalay area ; and that
his intention would be to reorganize and re-
inforce his armies behind a covering line, with

the view ultimately of passing again to the

Offensive. His forward covering troops were
disposed well north of the general line Lashio—
Shwebo—Myingyan—Akyab.

22. The location of Japanese formations at
the end of November was as follows:—

In the coastal sector, two divisions (the 54th
and 55th), comprising Twenty-eighth Japanese
Army, were distributed between Maungdaw
and Bassein. The enemy, however, appeared
to be withdrawing from the Paletwa area in the
Kaladan, leaving only small detachments north
of the Khawei—Paletwa line.*

Facing Fourteenth Army were three Japanese
divisions, the 15th, 31st and 33rd, all much
teduced in strength but with fresh drafts arriv-
ing.
Pinlebu area, and had recently withdrawn its

15 Division was based on the Wuntho—.

* Documents captured 4 after our offensive opened in-

the middle of Decem! showed that the Japanese

intended to hoid forward as long as possible, but that,

their main line was to be the Kaladan River from, and

including, Akyab and Kyauktaw.
