1930

281. It was during this period that the Burma
National Army, now renamed the Patriot
Burma Forces, began to take an active part
in the operations, The Japanese had raised
the Burma Defence Army of some 3,000 men,
and this force had come over to our side in
March. From this date they fought the Japanese
in co-operation with our troops, particularly
our Force 136, and the degree of co-operation
improved steadily as time went on, reaching its
climax in the battle of the break-out in July.
During May these organizations operated
courageously and successfully in a guerilla rdle
east of the Sittang. They were particularly
successful when they worked in co-operation
with 221 Group, R.A.F., attacking enemy
headquarters, dumps and stores, and damaging
communications. Their efforts were by no
means to be ignored, and the results attained
were a fit reward for the arduous conditions
under which they lived and in which the
RAF. pilots flew. Their presence compelled
the Japanese to abandon their attempts to
escape in small parties, and forced them to
adopt the alternative of a concentrated break-
out, which ended so disastrously for them.

SECTION XVII (paras. 282-291) Tae FINAL
BATTLES

Reorganization of the Allied Land Forces:
Formation and tasks of Twelfth Army: Opera-
tions in the Irrawaddy Valley: The Lower
Sittang Battle: The Battle of the Break-out:
Conclusion of operations.

282. Continuing the narrative of events, it
was towards the end of May that it became
necessary to reorganize my forces in order to
carry cut the operations planned to take place
against Malaya. These plans I will describe
in a later section, so here it is but necessary to
state that they involved the removal to India
of Headquarters, Fourteenth Army, and certain
formations and units. In India General Slim
- Was to be responsible for the planning and
preparations for the new venture, while Burma
became the responsibility of a new Army—
Twelfth Army, under the command of General
Stopford.

283. On the formation of Twelfth Army
(28th May, 1945), 33 Corps ceased to exist.
The formations allotted to Twelfth Army
were (by the 2nd June, 1945) 4 Corps
(consisting of 5, 17 and 19 Indian Divi-
sions), 7 and 20 Indian Divisions, 82 (West
African) Division, 255 Indian Tank Brigade,
6 British and 268 Indian Infantry Brigades.
26 Indian Division and 254 Indian Tank
Brigade were in the process of moving back to
India, but the guerilla forces mentioned in
paragraph 281 remained to operate under
Twelfth Army. To deal with internal security,
505 District and No. 1 Area were formed, with
their Headquarters at Meiktila and Rangoon
respectively. Besides administrative units, they
had at their disposal a total of eighteen infantry
battalions.

284. My directions to General Stopford were
to complete the destruction of the Japanese
forces remaining west of the Sittang, and to
liberate that part of Burma (including the
Tenasserim Civil Division) which Japanese
forces still occupied. He was also charged
with the introduction of the Civil Affairs Ser-

SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 12 APRIL, 1951

vice (Burma) into the country, the maintenance
of law and order, and the re-formation of the
Burma Army.

285. In order to carry out my orders,
General Stopford instructed 4 Corps (disposed
between the Sittang and the Pegu Yomas) to
block any attempts the Japanese might make to
break out of the Yomas, to advance along the
Taunggyi road and the Mawchi road, and to
maintain a brigade opposite the Sittang cross-
ing near Mokpalin. Meanwhile 7 Indian Divi-
sion (with 268 Indian Infantry Brigade under
command) were to clear the Allanmyo—Kama
—Prome area of Japanese stragglers, and
operate with offensive patrols into the Pegu
Yomas from the west. 20 Indian Division were
to act likewise in the area to the south of the
Yomas, and 6 Infantry Brigade and 255 Indian
Tank Brigade were held in reserve in Rangoon,
with the task of forming a mobile column in
the event of an enemy thrust towards Rangoon,
and in addition to operate water patrols in con-
junction with the Navy in the Irrawaddy Delta.

286.The operations under control of 7 Indian
Division in the Irrawaddy Valley around
Allanmyo proceeded as planned, and many
Japanese raiding and foraging parties were
destroyed. Patrols probed the Pegu Yomas
and met increasing resistance, until by mid-
June it was apparent that the valley was clear
and that the Japanese in the Pegu Yomas were
preparing an attempt to break out eastwards
through 4 Corps’ area. Of this Corps, 5 Indian
Division was about to leave to join Fourteenth
Army in India, and therefore 7 Indian Divi-
sion was switched to 4 Corps, leaving 268
Indian Brigade, now joined by 22 (East
African) Brigade, in the Irrawaddy Valley.

287. The relief of 5 Indian Division in the
area between Pegu and the Sittang by 7 Indian
Division coincided with a counter-attack by
elements of 18 and 53 Japanese Divisions
across the Sittang from Mokpalin. This was a
determined drive towards Pegu, designed to
assist the Japanese in the Southern Pegu Yomas
to break out eastwards by pinning down 7
Indian Division. The country in which the
battle was fought was one large lake, over-
looked by the Japanese artillery position in
the hills east of the Sittang. Conditions were.
such that at times it was impossible to use the
Gurkha battalions owing to the depth of water
on. the “land” over which they were to
operate. Our lack of artillery was made good
by the magnificent efforts of the R.AF., and
7 Indian Division was able to stem the attack.
A battalion (4/8 Gurkha Rifles) was at
one time surrounded at the end of a peninsula,
but fought its way out through the Japanese
lines, and by the end of July the situation was
testored to what it had been before the Japan-
ese attack. Owing to lack of co-ordination the
Japanese efforts did not assist their comrades
in the Pegu Yomas, and resulted in their sus-
taining casualties much larger than those of
7 Indian Division,

288. Operations on the Mawchi road con-
tinued throughout June and July. 19 Indian
Division made slow but steady progress despite
Japanese resistance, and dreadful climatic and
topographical difficulties. On the Taunggyi
road the Japanese resistance was less, and by
the 25th July Taunggyi itself was in our hands.
