1904

Generalissimo how vital the continued opera-
tions of the Chinese forces in Burma were, since
the issue of the main battle was not yet
decided, upon which our chance of capturing
Rangoon before the monsoon depended. While
he insisted on their eventual withdrawal, the
Generalissimo appeared to agree to the Chinese
divisions continuing the present operations, but
in actual fact the Chinese forces never came
beyond Lashio and Hsipaw. Moreover, the
Combined Chiefs of Staff confirmed the Gen-
eralissimo’s request for the Mars Brigade,
whose retention I had particularly pressed, by
an order for their move to China at once. As
will ibe seen from the account of operations
below, this put a virtual end to the offensive
operations of Northern Combat Area Com-
mand, though, of course, I realised that it
would be considered that the American forces
in Burma had achieved their primary object
once the Burma Road was opened to connect
with the road they had built from Ledo. I had
hoped that Northern Combat Area Command,
beside co-operating in the Mandalay battle,
could assist our further advance by sending
weak forces southwards towards Loilem, but
this was not to be.

119. On the 9th March, 36 British Division
captured Mongmit, and, advancing south-west
reached Mogok on the 20th. They were then
directed on to Kyaukme, which lies some 45
miles due south of Mogok. 50 Chinese Divi-
sion, advancing southwards from Namtu,
entered Hsipaw on the 16th March, and then
turned west down the road towards Kyaukme.
38 Chinese Division captured Lashio on the
7th March, and by the end of the month had
pushed south-south-east 38 miles along the
Lashio—Mongyai road. Other troops from this
Division turned south-west down the Lashio—
Hsipaw road and, by the 26th March, had
linked up with 50 Chinese Division in the
Hsipaw area.

120. This limited advance was the end of
Northern Combat Area Command’s opera-
tions. Unfortunately, the relaxing of the pres-
sure had, as already shown, allowed the
Japanese to reinforce the Mandalay sector from
this front. The bulk of 18 Japanese Division
had been brought into the Meiktila battle, while
later 56 Japanese Division with the remaining
regiment of the 18th were ordered to withdraw
their main forces for the main battle and hold
the right flank with minimum strength. On the
30th March, I issued orders for 36 British
Division to come under command of Fourteenth
Army on reaching Kyaukme. I also directed,
that one brigade should be flown into Manda-
lay as quickly as possible. The whole of 36
British Division was then to relieve 19 Indian
Division and assume control of operations in the
Maymyo—Mandalay—Ava area. This would
relieve the strain on Fourteenth Army until
the Japanese had been pushed further south,
but it could only be regarded as a temporary
expedient since the American aircraft, on which
36 British Division was dependent for main-
tenance, were to be withdrawn in May, before
which the Division would have to be flown out
to India. 36 British Division, less 26 Indian
Infantry Brigade which remained in Burma,
was actually flown out between the Ist and 21st

ay.

121. Returning now to the main battle on the
Fourteenth Army front: while our forces in

SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 12 APRIL, 1951

Meiktila were engaged in frustrating and des-
troying the Japanese built-up against them, the
remainder of 4 Corps was engaged in pushing
back the enemy west of the Irrawaddy, and
in expanding the Nyaungu bridgehead south-
wards towards Chauk and eastwards towards
Myingyan. On the 18th March, 33 Brigade (7
Indian Division) attacked prepared positions
south of Myingyan, securing the road and rail-
way crossing. On the 21st with tank support,
they forced an entry into the town, and by the
23rd the whole of Myingyan had been cleared.
Meanwhile, a detachment of the same Brigade
had cleared the Chindwin-Irrawaddy conflu-
ence area to the north-west. The capture of
Myingyan was a very important gain since it
opened the way for our Inland Water Trans-
port (1.W.T.) on the Chindwin. The admin-
istrative plan was to transport supplies by
water from Kalewa to Myingyan, and thence
by rail to Meiktila. It will be remembered that
we had no all-weather road from Kalewa to
Shwebo ; the alternative route by water was
therefore very important. A very great deal
of transport and constructional effort was being
expended on this I1.W.T. L. of C. as can be
seen in more detail in the part of this Des-
patch which deals with administration, and it
paid good ‘dividends.

122. At the same time as 7 Indian Division
(33 Brigade) was attacking Myingyan, 5 Indian
Division (161 Brigade) was advancing on
Taungtha. The hill massif north of the town
dominates the whole of this area and, after an
assault launched on the 28th March, this
feature was captured the following day. On the
30th, Taungtha was occupied, 161 Brigade was
at once relieved by 33 Brigade from Myingyan
and continued the advance, passing through
Mahlaing on the 31st March and making con-
tact with 17 Indian Division in the vicinity
of Thabutkon. The road to Meiktila was open,
and the rear echelon of 17 Indian Division,
followed by the whole of 5 Indian Division
(less the air-transportable brigade already in
Meiktila), moved forward immediately.

123. As already described (paragraph 111),
Yamamoto’s offensive against 4 Corps’ bridge-
head had completely failed. His forces on both
banks of the river were pushed back and, by
the end of March, 89 Brigade (7 Indian Divi-
sion) had entered Lanywa on the west bank
and were successfully probing south from
Singu, and west towards Kyaukpadaung, east
of the river. 7 Indian Division (less 33
Brigade) was placed under command of 33
Corps on the 29th March, when that Corps
entered the area in which the Division was
operating. 33 Brigade reverted to under the
command of 7 Indian Division on the 31st
March.

124. 20 Indian Division linked up their
bridgehead with that of 2 British Division to
the east on the 2nd March. The prolonged
period of severe defensive fighting had ended
and all three brigades broke out of the bridge-
head. By the 10th March, 80 Brigade had
taken Gyo to the south-east, capturing eleven
guns. On this date, also, 32 Brigade began
its break-through against stiff opposition and
advanced three miles. By the 12th March,
100 Brigade (from the west flank of the
Myinmu bridgehead) had captured the impor-
tant road junction of Myotha, inflicting heavy
casualties. The advance continued eastwards
