SUPPLEMENT To tHE LONDON GAZETTE, 12 APRIL, 1951

G.O.C., L. of C. Command, has paid special
tribute, as did United States officers who
visited this L. of C. Considerable economy in
recovery facilities was achieved in January,
1945, by locating a single recovery organization
with the H.Q., L. of C. Transport Column, and
making it responsible for the whole stretch of
road. Other special measures included the
equipping of each Recovery Company with
twelve extra jeeps, which formed “Spanner
Patrols.” These “Spanner Patrols,” which
had by this time become a standard E.M.E.
service with Fourteenth Army, had their
origin in the earlier advances by 5 Indian and
11 (ast African) Divisions. The condition of
the roads would not permit the sending out of
recovery vehicles as rearwards movement was
only possible at certain times. In addition
divisional and corps workshops had to be left
behind. Fitters in the “Spanner Patrols”
went up and down the roads in jeeps, doing’
what repairs they could, while vehicles needing
workshop attention were put into parks for
later repair. A lesson that was learnt was that
such parks required careful guarding, if the
vehicles in them were not to become unser-
viceable by the theft of vital parts and equip-
ment.

328. Mandalay was captured in March and
the implementation of my plans for the re-
organization of the L. of C. became necessary.
The raising of the new District to take over in
rear of Fourteenth Army was comparatively
simple and was brought about by the end of
the month. The return of 202 Area to India,
which was also part of my plan, was a much
more complicated business, especially as it
involved consideration of the question whether
404 Area should not also be handed over. It
was not until May, 1945, after prolonged
discussion with G.H.Q., India, at which the
Supreme Allied Commander, the A.O.C.-in-C.,
South-East Asia, and the G.O.C.-in-C., Eastern
Command, India, were represented, that it was
decided that 202 Area would be transferred to
control of India Command, while I retained
404 Area, but raised to District status. I may
add here that the actual handover did not take
place until the 1st June, 1945, on which date
also H.Q. L. of C. Command was disbanded,
and 404 Area came under my direct control.
The overall administrative organization of
Burma was considered at the same time and
my proposal to form 606 District for South
Burma out of the H.Q. L. of C. Command,
which became redundant, was agreed. Thus
after the fall of Rangoon, I should have three
Districts, 404 controlling Chittagong and
Arakan, 505 controlling Northern and Central
Burma including Mandalay, and 606 control-
ling Southern Burma, including eventually
Tenasserim,

329. Certain changes in organization had
taken place on the Movements and Transporta-
tion side of the Northern L. of C. A new L. of
C. Movement Control Group, No. 8, which had
moved up in February, on the 15th March took
over from the Movements and Transportation
staff of L. of C. Command, which was moved
to Arakan. This Group came under the direct
control of my H.Q., which had also taken over
the Movement Control Area (L. of C.),
Manipur Road from L. of C. Command at the
beginning of the month.

“1937

330. The final development of the Northern
L. of C. was the rehabilitation of stretches of
the Burma Railways. The line from Shwebo
to Sagaing was found to have been damaged
beyond repair, except as a long-term project.

The line from Myingyan to Meiktila was,
however, capable of development. I have
already said that it was thanks to our American
allies that the locomotives were brought in.
How this was done deserves description in
greater detail. Six five-ton petrol-driven loco-
motives were flown in sections to Myingyan and
there reassembled. General Stratemeyer pro-
vided a Liberator from his own H.Q. for this
special task. For use on the line north and
south through Meiktila, three giant MacArthur
locomotives, each weighing over 70 tons, were
loaded on special trailers (converted Macks)
and brought in by road to Kalewa, and on to
Myingyan, which involved ferrying over both
the Chindwin and the Irrawaddy. A senior
technical officer of the U.S. Army supervised
this often hazardous journey, where these mon-
strous vehicles at times had to negotiate hair-
pin bends overlooking deep precipices. Six
steam locomotives and tenders, each locomotive
weighing some 21 tons, were carried complete
on transporters to Kalewa and thence loaded
on to ramped cargo lighters and carried down
river to Myingyan. In addition, 2,540 tons of
heavy railway stores and material were brought
in by road, LW.T. and air.

The above, together with a few recaptured
and reconditioned locomotives and rolling stock
of the Burma Railways enabled us to reopen
rail communication from Mandalay and
Myingyan with a very limited though valuable
capacity, and to begin the work of railway re-
habilitation from Central Burma southwards
against the day when we could also work north-
wards from Rangoon. On the 23rd April, the
line from Myingyan to Meiktila was opened
with jeep trains giving a lift of 150 tons a day,
of which 70 tons a day could be taken forward
as far as Pyawbwe.

331. When we captured Mandalay, a com-
plete Japanese Base Workshop was found in
the town almost intact. This was a great
asset, as it saved bringing forward heavy
equipment. It is interesting to note that—
contrary to the generally held belief—the
Japanese machinery in this Base Workshop in-
cluded good quality high precision machine.
tools. The same applied to the mobile work-
shops that we captured, and their machinery
lorries were equal to ours.

332. One further aspect of the Northern
L. of C. deserves consideration, namely, petrol
distribution. In a country with poor and,
owing to the monsoon season, precarious com-
munications, the advantages of distributing
petrol by pipeline are especially obvious. It
was agreed in Decentber, 1944, that the control
of both the six-inch American pipeline from
Chittagong to Tinsukia in North-East Assam,
and the British four-inch pipeline to Manipur
Road, which ran parallel to it, should be
vested in the American Chief Engineer, who
controlled all the American pipelines in Bengal
and Assam. The allocation of products to
British and U.S. consumers was to be made by
FLO. Supreme Allied Command, South-East
Asia. About the same time a joint Allied Land
Forces, South-East Asia, and India Command
Committee decided that in future the grades
