SUPPLEMENT to THE LONDON GAZETTE, 12 APRIL, 1951

Kyaukpyu during April was a fine perform-
ance, the extent of which can be gauged by
the following figures for the transit traffic for
the month :—

Personnel 31,320
Vehicles 2,172
Stores ... 34,090 tons

_ 350. Finally, to put the scale of the develop-
‘ments described above into their proper pro-
portion, I will quote yet a few more figures. It
will be remembered that in April the average
daily tonnage requirements of Fourteenth Army
was 2,090 tons of which an average of 1,845
was delivered by air transport. The require-
ments of 15 Indian Corps were only 84 tons
‘per day, made wp as follows :—

Supplies... a .. 16 tons
Petrol, oi] and lubricants ... 16 tons
Ammunition 8 tons
Ordnance 4 tons
Engineers 16 tons
RAF. 8 tons
Stocking, etc. 16 tons

84 tons

Until I was finally compelled to take away
all air supply from 15 Indian Corps, 16 tons
daily was delivered by air and the rest by
sea to Akyab and Kyaukpyu.

From these figures it can clearly be seen that
the tremendous development of the Southern
L. of C. was almost entirely for Fourteenth
Army. The reason for and value of 15 Indian
Corps’ operations, which made this develop-
ment possible, and thus their contribution to
the reconquest of Burma is clear to see.

1941

SECTION XXII (paras. 351-365) THe DEVELOP-
MENT OF THE AIR LINES OF COMMUNICATION

The air supply situation in November, 1944:
The organization of F.AM.Os. and
R.A.M.Os.: Opening of Chittagong air base:
Formation and organization of C.A.A.T.O.:
The switch to Akyab and Ramree Advanced
Bases: The air supply situation in April, 1945:
Airfield construction: Casualty evacuation:
Situation after the capture of Rangoon.

351. The total inadequacy of the overland
Northern L. of C., in spite of the enormous
effort which was put into its improvement,
resulted in the development to an unprecedented
extent of the only practicable alternative,
supply by air, which became the main channel
for the supply and maintenance of the fighting
forces in the field. The results achieved in the
final stages of the campaign, during the rapid
advance to Rangoon exceeded in scale any-
thing done in any other theatre of operations
or indeed in the history of warfare. While
Tecognising that this system of the supply of an
army in the field, and the organization required
for it, are still in their infancy, and that much
has still to be learned, it is clearly of the
greatest value to give the closest examination
to this, its first really large-scale and con-
tinuous practical employment.

352. It will be remembered from Part I that
the original plans for Capital—the invasion of
Central Burma by Fourteenth Army—-were
based on using air supply on a very large scale.
In November, 1944, when I took over com-
mand, the average daily supply lift by air was
247 tons. The way in which this was handled
is best shown in tabular form, giving the loca-
tions of the air supply bases and the proportion
of the lift handled at each base.

Rear Airfield

Maintenance Remarks
Organizations
(R.A.M.Os.)

2 Combat Cargo Sqn.

US.A.A.F. moved
from Sylhet to
Imphal on the 21st
November, 1944.

Arrived November,
but did not operate
until December.

4 USAAF,

31 RAF, on No. 3 129
62 R.A.F. (less det.)

Det. 62 R.A.F. ... 24
Det. 1 U.S.A.A.F. (C.C.) 44
Seven (plus) Squadrons Six 247 tons

R.A.M.Os.

From the table it will be seen that three
main airfield areas were involved ; the Imphal
area, which includes Kangla and Tulihal, the
Comilla area with Agartala, and the Chittagong
area with Hathazari.

353. A word on the R.A.M.Os. is perhaps
necessary. These were Rear Airfield Main-
tenance Organizations which operated on the
despatching airfields. With each R.A.M.O.
there was one or more Air Despatch Com-
