1882

difficult arrangement came to an end. An in-
crement of United States staff officers under
Brigadier-General T. F. Wessels and Brigadier-
General R. T. Maddocks was added to my
Headquarters to provide adequate American
representation.

On taking over, I received my first Directive
from the Supreme Allied Commander.

3. My Advanced Headquarters were in the
process of moving from Delhi to Barrackpore,
where they opened on the Ist December, 1944.
Main Headquarters, Allied Land Forces, South-
East Asia, at the insistence of the Supreme
Allied Commander, were at Kandy where the
Supreme Allied Commander and the Air Com-
mander-in-Chief were located, while the Naval
Commander-in-Chief was nearby at Colombo.

It was not, however, possible for me to
exercise command from Kandy of an Army
Group which was actively engaged on three
widely separated fronts, 15 Indian Corps in
Arakan, Fourteenth Army in the Chin Hills,
west of the Chindwin River, and the British/
Chinese/American forces comprising the
American “Norther Combat Area Com-
mand” in Northern Burma. Even from
Barrackpore I was to find that it took me
1,500 miles flying to visit the three fronts.
Despite therefore the disadvantages of being
separated by so great a distance from the Head-
quarters of the Supreme Allied Commander and
from those of his two other Commanders-in-
Chief, it was necessary for me to base myself
on my Advanced Headquarters at Barrackpore.
which was in fact by far the larger echelon,
where all the day-to-day executive business of
the Headquarters was carried on. Actually
Barrackpore had certain other advantages.
First, Headquarters, Eastern Air Command,
were located only a mile or two down the
Hooghli. I was thus enabled to maintain that
close touch with General G. E. Stratemeyer
which was essential to our joint operations
while the battle for Burma was in progress.
Secondly, I was in a good position to visit
Delhi, the Headquarters of the India Base
through which all my supplies and personnel
had to pass. And, lastly, I was well placed to
visit formations training under G.H.Q., India,
which had been allocated to my future opera-
tions, and in particular those at the Combined
Training Centres at Cocanada and near
Bombay.

My Main Headquarters at Kandy was in
reality a strong liaison section under Major-
General I. S. O. Playfair, designed to main-
tain close contact with Headquarters, Supreme
Allied Commander, South-East Asia, and the
other Commanders-in-Chief.

4. On the 12th November, when J took over,
my command consisted of Fourteenth Army,
made up of 4, 15 and 33 Indian Corps, the
Northern Combat Area Command and Ceylon
Army Command. In addition there were cer-
tain formations in India, which although not
under my command, were allocated for my
future operations.

In Fourteenth Army (Lieutenant-General
Sir William Slim), 4 Indian Corps (Lieutenant-
General Sir Geoffry A. P. Scoones) consisted
of 19 Indian Division and 23 Indian
Division, which was in the process of being
withdrawn to India. 33 Indian Corps
(Qieutenant-General Sir Montagu G. N.
Stopford), consisted of 2 British Division, 5 and

SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 12 APRIL, 1951

20 Indian Divisions, 11 (East African)
Division, the Lushai Brigade, 268 Indian
(Lorried) Brigade, and 254 Indian Tank
Brigade. 7 Indian Division was in the Kohima
area and was destined for 4 Corps. 255 Indian
Tank Brigade at Imphal and 28 (East African)
Brigade were also under Fourteenth Army.
Fifteenth Indian Corps (Lieutenant-General Sir
A. F. Philip Christison) consisted of 25 and 26
Indian Divisions, 81 and 82 (West African)
Divisions, 50 Indian Tank Brigade and 3
Commando Brigade.

Northern Combat Area Command
(Lieutenant-General Dan I. Sultan) consisted
of First and Sixth Chinese Armies, 36
British Division, and 5332 U.S. (“‘ Mars”)
Brigade. First Chinese Army (General Sun
Li Jen) was composed of 30, 38, and 50
Chinese Divisions, while the Sixth (General
Liao Yo Hsiang) was composed of 14 and 22
Chinese Divisions. The Mars Brigade
(Brigadier-General J. P. Willy) was in fact
equivalent to a United States light division and
consisted of 475 United States Infantry
Regiment, 124 United States Cavalry Regi-
ment, and one Chinese regiment. In addition
Northern Combat Area Command possessed
one Chinese tank brigade.

Ceylon Army Command (Lieutenant-General
H. E. de R. Wetherall) consisted of a few
locally enlisted battalions and Base units, and
also the small garrisons in the island bases
of Addu Atoll and Diego Garcia.

In India, assigned to my operations, but not
under my command, were Special Force, made
up of 14, 16 and 23 Infantry Brigades, 77 and
111 Indian Infantry Brigades and 3 (West
African) Infantry Brigade, which together
formed six Long-Range Penetration Groups, 50
Parachute Brigade, two tank regiments (25
Dragoons and 149 R.A.C.), and certain small
units. 17 Indian Division was in India in
G.H.Q. Reserve and not under my command.

5. In mid-November, a reorganization of
the chain of command took place, which had
been planned by General Giffard with
the object of freeing the Commander,
Fourteenth Army, from the control of opera-
tions in Arakan, and from the responsibility
of administering the long and difficult lines of
communication in Assam. In this way he
would be enabled to concentrate his full atten-
tion on the coming offensive across the
Chindwin River into Central Burma. Accord-
ingly on the 15th November, Lines of Com-
munication Command was formed under
Major-General G. W. Symes, with its H.Q. at
Comilla. It comprised 202 L. of C. Area
(.Q., Gauhati), consisting of four sub-areas
and the Fort Hertz Area, and 404 L. of C.
Area of four sub-areas; it included a very
great number of Base and L. of C. units. The
policy was to be that the rear boundaries of
Fourteenth Army and 15 Corps would be
adjusted as the progress of operations allowed,
in order to free them from rearward responsi-
bilities. On the 16th November, 15 Corps was
separated from Fourteenth Army and came
direct under my command. I thus had under
my command three major formations im con-
tact with the enemy, 15 Corps, Fourteenth
Army and Northern Combat Area Command,
with the L. of C. Command in the rear up

‘to the boundary between South-East Asia

Command (S.E.A.C.) and India Command.
