SUPPLEMENT to Tas LONDON. GAZETTE, 17 OCTOBER, 1950

Attack by TIRPITZ

9. The first convoys to receive heavy ship
cover were P.Q.12 and Q.P.8, unusually large
convoys of between 15 and 20 ships each,
which sailed from Hvalfiord and the Kola
Inlet on 1st March. Cover was provided by
the whole Home Fleet as far as longitude 14°
East ; but the real danger, in my opinion, was

that arising from U-boat and air attack further .

east, and I was unable to obtain any increase
in the meagre A/S escorts of these convoys
or in the scale of A.A. defence, except for a
promise of Russian long-range fighters, at some
future unspecified date, in the approaches to
the Kola Inlet. .

10. The eastbound convoy, P.Q.12, was
fortuitously sighted by aircraft off Iceland.
Probably, in my opinion, suspecting that the
convoy was transporting troops to effect a land-
ing in North Norway, the TIRPITZ was
tempted out to attack it. She failed to locate
it, but succeeded in sinking a straggler, the
I-JORA, from the westbound convoy (Q.P.8)
‘on the 7th March.

11. The same low visibility which hampered
the TIRPITZ, and severe icing conditions
which precluded the use of our aircraft for
reconnaissance, prevented me from bringing
her to action ; but she was attacked by the air-
craft of the VICTORIOUS off the Lofoten
Islands, on her way back to Trondheim,
apparently without success. She immediately

took refuge at Narvik and completed her

passage on 13th March.

12, I had, despatched eight destroyers under
Captain (D), 8th Destroyér Flotilla, with the
TRINIDAD in support, to sweep up the coast
from 66° North on the night of 12th/13th
March, in the hope that the TIRPITZ would
make an earlier move. Five submarines were
maintained on patrol off the northern entrance
to Trondheim, but did not succeed in attacking.

P.Q.13 and Q.P.9

13. The next two convoys, P.Q.13 and Q.P.9,
each of 19 ships, sailed on 20th and 21st
March respectively, ‘after a 48-hour delay
caused by the presence of U-boats off the Kola
Inlet. It was not possible materially to increase
the A/S escort, which consisted of two des-
troyers, a minesweeper and two trawlers for
the eastbound convoy, and one destroyer and
two minesweepers for the westbound one, but
one cruiser accompanied each as close cover,
with another west of Bear Island in support:
the main fleet, under the command of the Vice
Admiral Second’ in Command* gave cover
over the western half of the route against the
heavy surface forces at Trondheim, while five
minesweepers and a Russian destroyer rein-
forced the escorts off the Murmansk coast; no
air support was available outside the immediate
vicinity of the Kola Inlet.

14. The enemy made another determined
attempt to interfere with the convoys. P.Q.13
was located by aircraft, east of Bear Island, on
‘28th March and repeatedly attacked by dive
bombers, three ships being sunk. On the
following day, the TRINIDAD and ECLIPSE
came in contact with three enemy destroyers
attempting to attack the same convoy: in brief
engagements in very low visibility one enemy

Admiralty footnote :— .
* Vice Admiral A, T. B, Curteis, C.B.

5141

destroyer was sunk and others damaged, the
TRINIDAD being hit by a torpedo and her
speed reduced, and the ECLIPSE having two
guns put out of action. A Russian destroyer
was also in action, but without result. The
convoy had experienced heavy weather and was
widely scattered, but 14 ships reached their
destinations, the remaining two probably hav-
ing been sunk by U-boats, of which at least
nine were operating in the area. One U-boat
was seriously damaged by the GOSSAMER,
of the local escort,

15. Q.P.9 was fortunate to escape detection
and arrived complete. in Iceland. One U-boat
was sighted on 24th March in low visibility,
rammed and suk by the SHARPSHOOTER.*
Increased Protection .

16. These attacks, and the continued move-.
ment northward of enemy surface, U-boat and
air. reinforcements, showed clearly the import-
ance attached by the enemy to the stoppage of |
this traffic. Further representations to the Ad-
miralty were therefore made and some
destroyers .and corvettes from the Western
Approaches were promised for the next con-
voys. The Russians also agreed to receive a
mission from’ Coastal Command to help in
organising their oversea reconnaissance and
fighter protection. I recommended that the
number of convoys should be reduced during
the next few months, when the German aero-
drome conditions and air reconnaissance would
improve, whilst the convoy routes would still
be restricted by ice: but the U.S.A. was now
giving first priority to deliveries to Russia, of
which her quota was far behind schedule, and
it seemed probable that the convoys would in-
crease rather than decrease.

N

EXTRACT FROM DESPATCH COVERING THE '
Periop 1st Apri To 30TH Jung, 1942

Home Fleet,
‘2nd August, 1942. -

1. Throughout the quarter the Russian con-
voys remained the chief commitment of the
Home Fleet. The last pair to be run in March
had been heavily attacked, and the enemy was
obviously determined to do everything in his.
power to stop this traffic. The U-boat and air
forces in Northern Norway had been heavily
reinforced, the three remaining destroyers were
disposed offensively at Kirkenes, and the heavy
forces at Trondheim remained a constant, if
reluctant, threat. : .

2. Early in April destroyers, corvettes and
trawlers were transferred from the Western -
Approaches to bring the A/S escort of each
convoy up to ten. Requests were made to the
Russian naval authorities to co-operate by
reinforcing the escort at the eastern end of the
Toute, by providing long-range fighter or A/S
air escort and bombing the enemy aerodromes,
and by disposing their submarines south of the
convoy route to discourage surface raiders east
ae Island. The response was disappoint-
P.Q.14 and Q.P.10

3. Convoys P.Q.14 (23 ships) and Q.P.10 (16
ships) sailed on 8th and 10th April respectively.

Admiralty footnote :-— : :

* The sinking of this submarine, U.655, by H.M.S..
SHARPSHOOTER, and also that of U.585 by H.M.S. Fury
in this area, has since been confirmed. j

\
