SUPPLEMENT to tas LONDON GAZETTE, 17 OCTOBER, 1950

anything was in the wind was an attack by the
NORTHERN SPRAY, one of the rescue

trawlers, on a U-boat near Jan Mayen Island. -

It is probable that the news of this encounter
led the enemy to increase his air -reconnais-
sance and.U-boat patrols. Of the thirteen east-
bound ships, five reached Archangel, four were
sunk, one ran aground near South Cape, Spitz-
bergen, and three returned to Iceland. Only
four westbound ships were sailed, of which
three arrived safely at Akureyri: the fourth
was recalled when it became apparent that there
was considerable enemy activity in the Barents
Sea, but failed to get the signal and was sunk.
A fifth westbound Russian ship was sailed on
14th November,: just ahead of Q.P.15, and
atrived safely. The Russians thereafter con-
tinued to sail ships independently in the
intervals between convoys: four more were
sailed late in November and fifteen in
December: all arrived without loss.

QPAS
5. The operations for the occupation of
French North Africa left too few-ships in the
Home Fleet-to provide escorts on the earlier
scale ; but the light and ice conditions, more
favourable than at any other time of the year,
and the withdrawal of much of the German Air
Force in Northern Norway offered opportunities
for more lightly escorted convoys. It was there-
fore decided to resume this traffic in mid-
* November with a westbound convoy from the
White Sea.

6. As the passagé would be made in almost
continuous darkness, and foul weather could
also be expected, I requested that the convoy
should be limited to twenty ships, but
the Admiralty directed that thirty ships
should be included. It -sailed on 17th
November, escorted by five minesweepers,
four corvettes, one trawler and one
A.A. ship; and was to be reinforced in the
Barents Sea by five destroyers under the com-
mand of Captain (D), 8th Destroyer Flotilla,
relieved by five others from a position west
of Bear Island. The Rear Admiral Com-
manding, Ist Cruiser Squadron*, in the
LONDON, with the SUFFOLK and ‘three

destroyers, provided surface cover west of Bear-

Island. One Russian and three British sub-
marines operated off the exits from Altenfiord,
to deter the HEPPER and KOLN from sailing.

_ 7%. The convoy met a succession of gales

throughout its passage. These, with the almost
complete lack of daylight, caused it to become
very scattered. Neither destroyer force
succeeded in making contact with the main
body ; and by the time the convoy had passed
Bear Island, it and its escort had broken up
into a number of small groups, spread over a
large area and without knowledge of each
other’s whereabouts. The route was adjusted
to pass south of Bear Island and avoid the
normal U-boat concentration between there
and Spitzbergen, but many ships did not
receive the amending signal. :

8. In the absence of air reconnaissance, for
which the weather was quite unsuitable, the
enemy was presumably even more lacking in
knowledge of the situation than ourselves. Of
the thirty ships which sailed, twenty-seven

Admiralty footnote :— :
* Rear Admiral L, H. K. Hamilton, D.S.O.

5151

arrived safely in Icelandic waters, one returned
to Kola Inlet and two were sunk, both probably
by U-boats. The safe arrivals were rounded
up and taken straight on in two convoys to
Loch Ewe.

Mid-winter Policy
9. From late November to mid-January the

‘lack of daylight is such that air reconnaissance

in the Arctic is virtually impossible. Provided
that a convoy is of such a size that it can
be handled and kept together, it therefore
stands an excellent chance of evading both
U-boat and surface attack, and even of com-
pleting the passage without the enemy know-
ing of its existence. A large convoy, on the
other hand, is likely to fail to keep in company
and to split, as did Q.P.15, into a large number
of small groups, covering a vast area and un-
aware of each other’s position or composition.
Such small groups would be more liable to
detection by U-boats than a single concentrated
convoy, and would present the enemy surface
forces with an ideal opportunity for an offen-
sive sweep. Our own covering forces are
always handicapped by having to identify a
radar contact before they are free to attack:
the enemy need not do so. The splitting of
the convoy into a large number of scattered
units would greatly add to this handicap.

10. It was obviously advantageous to. run
through as many ships as possible during this
short dark period, rather than to defer our
commitments until air reconnaissance could
start again. Though it would be impossible
to provide strong surface escort for a large
nuniber of small convoys, the chances of
evasion were, in my opinion, so good that the
tisk of interception by superior surface forces
should be accepted.

11. I had asked that about six merchant
ships, escorted by three trawlers, should be
held ready in Iceland to sail shortly before the
arrival of Q.P.15. if the U-boats were drawn
out of position by that convoy; but the
Admiralty did not approve this suggestion.
They proposed instead to wait until 22nd
December and then to sail a convoy of thirty-
one ships, with an escort of summer dimen-
sions. The experience of Q.P.15 confirmed —
my opinion that a convoy of this size could
not be handled: the Admiralty proposal, more-
over, would waste the first half of the dark
period,

12. I therefore signalled my intention on
25th November to limit the convoy in size and
asked that the assembly of the first ten ships
might be hastened. This small convoy was to
be escorted by four destroyers from the Home
Fleet and any minesweepers and trawlers
which could be made available. The
Admiralty, however, insisted in their reply of
26th November that it was essential to provide
a covering force strong enough to deal with
the scale of attack which they expected, and
considered that the only alternatives were
either to sail thirty ships in company, or in
three groups so close together that one force
could cover all three. After.further discussion,
including a visit to London by my Chief of
Staff, I was directed to sail the convoy in two
parts of sixteen ships each, escorted by seven
destroyers and some smaller craft; and the
Home Fleet’ was reinforced by two 6-inch
