3154

HIPPER had been driven off, the close escort
_ had been shepherding the convoy to the south-
ward. Several enemy ships had been reported,
but none of these attacked and it is possible
that these reports .were mistaken. The
OBEDIENT, GRWELL and OBDURATE
were concentrated between the convoy and the
enemy heavy ships, the ONSLOW was
stationed at the head of the convoy, and the
ACHATES, who reported that she was holed
forward and speed reduced to 15 knots, was
ordered to proceed to the same position. She
had been covering the convoy with smoke, with
the utmost coolness and efficiency, since the
start of the action, and had sustained this
damage from a near miss at about 0945,

32. Unfortunately, she again became the first
target of the attacking heavy unit (LUTZOW
or 6-inch cruiser). Her bridge was hit, her
Commanding Officer killed, and considerable
damage was sustained in a boiler room and
elsewhere. In spite of this she continued,
under the command of her First Lieutenant,
Lieutenant L. E. P. Jones, R.N., to screen the
convoy with smoke for another hour and forty
minutes, until compelled at 1300 to ask the
NORTHERN GEM to stand by. Half an
hour later the ACHATES sank. The loss of
this ship and so many of her fine company,
after the outstanding work she had done, is
most deeply regretted. Eighty-one survivors
were picked up. :

33. The enemy ship, after damaging the
ACHATES, had been engaging the remaining
three destroyers, trying to break through to
the convoy. She managed to put the
OBEDIENT’s W/T out of action, and the
OBDURATE was ‘ordered to assume com-
mand, but apart from this she had no success,
while several hits were claimed on her. Two
destroyers which followed her took no part in
the action. She disappeared to the north-
westwards at 1130. Twice more during the
next forty minutes did an enemy heavy ship
approach the convoy but: each time she was

. driven off by the escort. On the first of these
occasions the shell splashes are reported to
have been larger than any others seen that day,
and it seems probable that these two attacks,
at any rate, were made by the LUTZOW.
Finally, this ship, whoever she was, also with-
drew to the north-westward.

SUPPLEMENT To Taz LONDON GAZETTE, 17 OCTOBER, 1950

34. The SHEFFIELD and JAMAICA main-
tained touch with the two heavy ships until
1345, by which time it was established beyond
all doubt that they were retiring towards their

base. Minor splinter damage was sustained
but no casualties.

The cruisers then returned
to cover the convoy. ‘

35. The close escort, who were unaware that
the enemy had finally left, spent an anxious
night ; but no further attack developed and the
convoy arrived complete at Kola'Inlet.

36. The conduct of all officers and men of the
escort and covering forces throughout this
successful action against greatly superior forces
was’ in accordance with the traditions of the
service. That an enemy force of at least one
pocket battleship, one heavy cruiser and. six
destroyers, with all the advantage of surprise
and concentration, should be held off for four
hours by five destroyers and driven from the
area by two 6-inch cruisers, without any loss to
the convoy, is most creditable and_ satisfactory.

Additional Cover.

37. Though full information of the progress
of this action did not become available till later,
it was evident that the cruiser force was unlikely
to have enough fuel remaining to cover R.A.51
throughout the dangerous part of its passage.
I therefore put to sea in the KING GEORGE
V, with the HOWE, KENT, BERWICK, BER-
MUDA and six destroyers, to give additional .
cover. The weather limited the speed of the
destroyers, so the Rear Admiral Commanding,
1st Cruiser Squadron was detached with the
two heavy cruisers:to proceed at best speed to
a covering position south-west of Bear Island ;
the battlefleet occupied a covering area further
to the west.

38. The enemy surface forces, however, had

apparently had enough. Captain (D), 8th
Destroyer Flotilla, in command of the escort, by

‘the help of D/F bearings and contacts obtained

with radar, manceuvred the convoy to avoid
the small number of U-boats which were on
patrol and brought it without loss to the United
Kingdom.

Summary of Results

_ 39. The approximate scale of attack and the
losses of merchant shipping. on this route during
the quarter were: — .

Convoy Ships sailed Attacked by Ships lost paached

QP. 15 U-boats
LW. SIA _
IW. SIIB)... | Heavy surface forces...

. U-boats
RA. Si ~ . - 14
Independents Unknown... ae 6 28
Notes

(i) Where the sum of the columns 4 and 5 is less than column 2, the remaining ships returned to their port of

*parture, : : : .
Gi) The U-boat effort was smaller than in the previous quarters, and varied between 3 and 7 against each convoy.
Gii) Air attacks were experienced by a few of the independently sailed ships only.

: LONDON :
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY HIS MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE
1950

Price 1s. 6d. net

PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN

S.O. Codé No. 65 39041
