SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 17 OCTOBER, 1950

destroyers of the cruiser force and await the
teturn of the destroyer covering force. All the
destroyers with the convoy were topped up in
succession throughout the passage by t the two
oilers in company.

U-. Boat and Air Attacks

43. Though several promising attacks on
U-boats had already been’ made by the escorts,
the first losses to the convoy from U-boat
attack did not occur until just before Rear
Admiral Commanding, Home Fleet Destroyers
tejoined: two ships were sunk.

44. The air attacks started in the afternoon
with a. diversion by six bombers, followed
immediately by a massed attack by forty to
fifty torpedo aircraft, each cartying two
torpedoes. This attack came in low, and little
more than visual warning was obtained, with
the result that the fighters were caught out of
position, chasing bombers and shadowers. The
attack was pressed right home and eight ships
were sunk. -Two smaller torpedo attacks were
made. that day, but no more ships were hit.
One more serious loss occurred during the
night, the large ‘freighting. tanker ATHEL
TEMPLAR being sunk by U-boat.

45. As a result of his experience on the first
day, the Commanding Officer,
. AVENGER, decided to change his tactics and

teserve his fighters for the heavy attacks.

Fighter patrols were rélieved at short intervals,
so that they should not be short of fuel or
ammunition if an attack developed without
warning, and the main force of fighters was
not normally flown off until the striking force
was actually in sight. This system, though it
did not give the fighters time to prevent an
attack from developing, did ensure that they
should harass its final stages, disturbing the
enemy and spoiling his aim.

46. Combined with the greater accuracy of
anti-aircraft gunfire, which came with experi-
ence, the new tactics proved successful. Two
heavy torpedo attacks, by twenty-two and
twenty-five aircraft respectively, and two bomb-
ing attacks, all on 14th September, succeeded
only in sinking one merchant ship ; and a pro-

. longed attack by about seventy bombers on
the next day was entirely. without success.
During the whole period, just over two days,
of concentrated air attack, the enemy lost at
least forty aircraft: there can be little doubt

that these heavy casualties, especially among,

his limited supply of really skilled torpedo
pilots, was largely responsible for the steady
decline in the size and vigour of his attacks.

47. The AVENGER, whose flying deck is
foo small for landing on when the ship is pitch-
ing, was fortunate in having calm weather
throughout the operation. The precaution of
attaching two Hunt class destroyers to the
AVENGER, for her close protection, proved
its value. Several attacks were directed
especially at her, but she suffered no damage.

48. No more air attacks were made on
P.Q.18 while the destroyer covering force was
in company, but off Cape Kanin, near the
entrance to the White Sea, three further attacks
succeeded in sinking one more ship. . Three
more ran aground in a heavy gale of ‘the Dvina
Bar, but were later refloated, so that twenty-
seven of the original forty, and all the escort,
arrived safety at Archangel.

HM.”

5149

O.P.14

49. The westbound convoy of sixteen
merchant ships, escorted by two Hunt class
destroyers, two anti-aircraft ships, four
corvettes, three minesweepers and four trawlers,
sailed from Archangel on 13th September.
They were. routed east of P.Q.18 to pass that
convoy in approximate Jatitude 73° 30’ North,
off Nova Zemlya. Here, Rear Admiral Com-
manding, Home Fleet Destroyers with his six-
teen destroyers, the AVENGER arid her two
Hunt class destroyers, and the two convoy
oilers, transferred in three groups from P.Q.18
to Q.P.14 during the night of 16th/17th
September.

50. The latter convoy had been sighted
earlier by German aircraft, but the weather was
now thick and no shadowers were present to
witness the transfer. Nor had any U-boats
apparently succeeded in following the covering.
force across. The favourable weather con-
tinued, and in -spite of one aircraft sighting on
18th September, Rear Admiral Commanding,
Home Fleet Destroyers had hopes of getting
safely past the southern end of Spitzbergen and
evading further attack by a turn there to the
north-westward. But the convoy was located
again by two. enemy aircraft on the morning
of 19th September, and the U-boat pack joined
up again during the day.

51. Rear Admiral Commanding, Home Fleet
Destroyers had decided not to weaken the
escort by going again to Lowe Sound to refuel.
He had detached two destroyers to bring one
oiler from there to join the convoy, and to
order the other, with her escort, to return to
Iceland. One ship, which had straggled soon
after leaving the White Sea, rejoined; and
another straggler was collected by a destroyer
detached from the convoy and escorted to join
the Spitzbergen oiler force. ,

52. No air attacks developed, but the U-boat
pack, whose performance so far had been
mediocre, made a final effort to redeem their
failure. In spite of vigorous counter-attacks
by the powerful escort, they succeeded in sink-
ing the minesweeper LEDA (Commander
A. H. Wynne-Edwards, R.N.) and one merchant
ship on 20th September, and in hitting the

» SOMALI (Lieutenant Commander C. D.

Maud, D.S.C., R.N.) in the engine room. The
latter was taken in tow by the ASHANTI.
The tow continued under difficult and dan-
gerous conditions for four nights and three
days ; but then a northerly gale arose and the
SOMALI broke in half and sank, a most
unfortunate end to a gallant attempt.

53. In view of the U-boat menace, Rear
Admiral Commanding, Home Fleet Destroyers

‘had meanwhile detached the SCYLLA and

AVENGER to Seidisfiord, transferring his flag
to the MILNE. On 22nd September two more
merchant ships and the RF.A. GREY
RANGER were sunk by U-boats*. The convoy
had been routed east of Iceland and through -
to Loch Ewe, and the covering force destroyers

Admiralty footnote : —

* As a result of these U-boat movements, the gonvoy
was given anti-U- ‘boat escort by Catalinas from
Voe. On the 2 September, one of these aircratt,
although it did an actually meet the convoy, sighted
a U-boat at 0533Z in the vicinity of the convoy and
steering a course of 160° towards it. This U-boat was
attacked by the aircraft with six depth charges and
destroyed.
