SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 17 OCTOBER, 1950

southward. The sky was mostly covered with
low cloud ; wind W.N.W. force 3; sea slight
- with no swell... There were 16 degrees of frost,
and ice on all ships.

24, The HYDERABAD, on the. starboard
quarter of the convoy; sighted two destroyers
(ater seen to be three) bearing 180° at
0820: she thought they were Russian destroyers
coming to reinforce the escort and did not re-
port them: but they:-were sighted and reported
soon afterwards by the OBDURATE, stationed
on the starboard beam of the convoy. She
closed them at best speed and they retired to
the north-westward, across the stern of the con-
voy, opening fire at 0930 on the OBDURATE,
who retired on the convoy. ptain (D),
17th Destroyer Flotilla, from stent altered.
down the port side of the convoy and ordered
the destroyers tq concentrate. While the

ORWELL, OBEDIENT and OBDURATE

‘were moving to comply, the ACHATES, whose
Station was on the port quarter, started to lay
a smoke screen to cover the convoy, which
made an emergency turn to 135°.

25. Before the other destroyers had joined,
the ONSLOW sighted a large ship to the north-
westward, coming towards her at high speed.
This was probably the HIPPER. She turned
east and opened fire on the ACHATES, who
was very conspicuous because. of her smoke
screen. The ONSLOW immediately opened
fire, at 9,000 yards, and turned to a course

parallel to the enemy to keep between her and .

the convoy. The other three “O” class
destroyers were now joining and the enemy re-
tired to the northward under smoke, firing a
few salvos at the convoy as she did so.

26. Captain (D), 17th Destroyer Flotilla
concluded that the enemy was unwilling to
face the risk of torpedo attack by our
destroyers and for the next 25 minutes he made
use of this fact. He detached the OBEDIENT
and OBDURATE to close the convoy and in-
crease its protection against any attempt by the
enemy deéstroyers to attack ; and himself in the
ONSLOW, with the ORWELL in company,
conducted an intermittent action with the
HIPPER, scoring several hits and preventing
her from coming any closer to the convoy. At
1020, However, the ONSLOW was hit four
times in rapid succession. and suffered con-
siderable damage. A and B guns were put out
of action and fire broke out in the fore super-

structure and messdeck, the main aerials and |

both radar sets were destroyed, the engine room
holed, and Captain (D) was severely wounded
in thé face, disabling the left eye so that he
could not see, In spite of this severe handicap
he continued to direct the flotilla and his ship
until compelled to disengage the ONSLOW as
a result of a further hit. Only after receiving
Teports that the hole in his engine room was
plugged, that the main engines and steering gear
were still efficient and that OBEDIENT had
taken charge of the destroyers in accordance
with his signalled instructions did he consent
to leave his bridge to receive medical attention.
From his sea cabin he continued to receive
teports of the action and to advise Lieutenant
‘Commander T. J. G. Marchant, R.N., who
assumed command of the ONSLOW.*

Admiralty foo!note :-—~*

bd Certain (D), 17th Destroyer Flotilla, Captain R.
St. Sherbrooke, D.S.0., R.N., was ” subsequently
Swarded the V.C. for his conduct on this occasion. «

5153

27: Rear Admiral (D) meanwhile, away to
the northward, had at 0858 obtained radar con-
tact on a ship to the north-westward of his
force. ‘While closing to identify this echo he
sighted at 0932 gun flashes over the horizon to
the southward, but considered that they were
H.A. fire. The echo was the VIZALMA and
her merchant vessel ; but before they could be
identified as such, the gunfire to the south- .
ward increased and an enemy report was
received from Captain (D) 17. Course was
altered to close and speed worked up to 31
knots.

28. About 1030, soon after the ONSLOW
had suffered her damage, two ships were de-
tected by SHEFFIELD’s radar, one bearing
180° and the other 140°, both on an easterly
course. From’ subsequent examination of the
teports it apears probable (but by no means
certain) that the former was the HIPPER and
the latter the LUTZOW, some miles ahead of
her. Although both ships came in sight soon
after’and Were seen to be larger than destroyers,
and therefore enemy; it was impossible to_
identify them precisely: Rear Admiral (D)
therefore altered to the eastward to allow the
radar action -plot to become clearer*.

29. After the cruisers had been on this course
for about 20 minutes, the leading enemy ship
(probably LUTZOW) altered to starboard to-
wards the convoy and Rear Admiral (D) turned
towards the other, who soon followed her con-
sort to the southward. The SHEFFIELD and
JAMAICA opened fire on this second ship
(probably HIPPER) and appeared to take her
completely by surprise, as she failed to reply
till after the SHEFFIELD’s fourth salvo. Hits
were seen almost at once and the enemy
appeared to alter towards under cover of
smoke. While the SHEFFIELD was starting
to conform, a destroyer was suddenly sighted
fine on the bow and fire was shifted to this new
target. She was hit at once and repeatedly,
and left in a sinking condition. The Germans
later admitted the loss of this destroyer. The
JAMAICA meanwhile was engaging another
destroyer, which turned away and was lost to
view.

30.. During this action the radar had con-
tinued to track the original target (probably .
HIPPER), and as soon as it was over the chase
was resumed. She was sighted again at 1215
and soon after two destroyers and the second
large ship (probably LUTZOW) came in sight,
all steering to the westward. The last named
ship had probably made a wider sweep to the
east and south than her consort and sank the
BRAMBLE in the course of it; for a report
was received from the BRAMBLE of an enemy
cruiser, and an engagement was seen in her
probable direction between a heavy ship and
a much smaller one which fired a single gun
and pom-pom tracer. At 1045 an enemy ship
from the north-eastward came in sight of the
OBEDIENT, and the destroyers protecting the
convoy once more went into action. It is not
possible definitely to establish which ship this
was: there is some evidence to suggest that it
was a third heavy ship, possibly a 6-inch
cruiser, or it may have been the LUTZOW.

31. Since the Commanding Officer, H.M.S.
OBEDIENT -had taken command and the
Admiralty footnote :—

* The enemy force was in fact Lurzow, Hiprer and
six large destroyers, one of which was sunk,
