* as the Polish destroyer GARLAND:

- Ju.88s:

5144
25. Owing to the evident inability of the

“Russians to provide air co-operation in the

Barents Sea, I had asked for R.A.F. recon-
naissance and long-range fighter aircraft to be
stationed in North Russia. These would pro-
vide the convoys, during the worst part of their
passage, with A/S patrols, fighter protection
and reconnaissance against surface attack.
But the number of aircraft, in Coastal Com-
mand was insufficient to meet any of these
requirements and the convoys had to continue
this most hazardous passage virtually without
air co-operation (see also paragraph 32),

P.Q.16 and Q.P.12

26. P.Q.16, which sailed on 20th May, con-
tained 35 ships and, despite the fact that this
was the most unfavourable time of the year,
was the largest convoy which had so far been
run. It was escorted by five destroyers, four
ites, four trawlers, one minesweeper and
A.A. ship. It was located by enemy air-
crdtt on 24th May and, though one shadower
was shot down on 25th May by the Hurricane
from the C.A.M. ship, was shadowed con-

tinuously for the next six days.

27. The first attack, 380 miles from the
enemy aerodromes, was made on 25th May
by eight torpedo aircraft and about’ twenty
one ship, the American s.s. CARL-
TON, had a steam pipe fractured and turned
back for Iceland, in tow of the trawler
NORTHERN SPRAY:. one Ju.88 was shot
down and four more were probably destroyed.

28. The main weight of air attack started
on the afternoon of 26th May and continued
almost without respite until 30th May. During
this period no less than 34 torpedo aircraft
and 210 bombers attacked the convoy, sinking
five ships and damaging three others, as well
three air-
craft were shot down and twelve more were
probably destroyed. Numerous attempts were

Convoy

SUPPLEMENT to THs LONDON GAZETTE, 17 OCTOBER, 1950

made by U-boats to attack the convoy, but
with one exception they were driven off,
several U-boats being damaged: in the one
successful attack, one.ship was sunk, making
a total loss of six ships out of 35. The small-
ness of the losses in comparison with the enemy
effort was due to the skill and endurance of
the escort, under the command of the Com-
manding Officer of the ASHANTI, and to the
steadiness, good gunfire and excellent station
keeping of the convoy. The German bombers
pressed their attacks home on one day only,
while their torpedo aircraft were cautious in
the extreme and generally ineffective. Some
Russian fighters were present on the last two
days and claimed to have destroyed some of
the enemy after their attacks.

29..Q.P.12, escorted by six destroyers, one
A.A. ship, one minesweeper and four trawlers,
left Kola Inlet on 31st May. They were
sighted shortly after sailing; but the enemy
concentrated all his force on the more im-
portant eastbound convoy and Q.P.12 reached
Iceland without being attacked.

30. The cruiser covering force was in com-
pany with P.Q.16 for the first air attack, but
their operations were otherwise without in-
cident, as were those of the heavy covering
force. The threat of surface attack by the
two pocket battleships at Narvik did not
materialise.

P.Q.17 and Q.P.13

431. The operation for the supply of Malta,
early in June, left insufficient destroyers in
the Home Fleet for the simultaneous running
of Russian convoys. The next pair were there-
fore postponed until 27th June.

Summary of Results

32. The approximate scale of attack and the
losses for the convoys run during the quarter
were: —

Ships lost Attacked by destination
1 U-boats . 1
2 U-boats i
2 34 bombers
0 U-boats ... . 22
0 6 bombers
3 6 torpedo aircraft ‘

1 3 destroyers 12
0 -boats

0 4 torpedo aircraft

1 ‘| U-boats ... 27
5 208 bombers

1 34 torpedo aircraft

0 Nil 14

Note.—About 15 U-boats operated against each pair of convoys.

EXTRACT FROM DESPATCH COVERING THE
Prriop ist JuLy To 30TH SEPTEMBER, 1942
Home Fleet,
3rd January, 1943.
Threat of Heavy Surface Attack
Information received in June indicated that
the enemy intended, at last to bring out his
main units to attack the next eastbound convoy
east of Bear Island. The strategical situation
thus produced was wholly favourable to the

enemy. His heavy ships would be operating
close to their own coast, with the support of
powerful shore-based air reconnaissance and
striking forces, and protected, if he so desired,
iby a screen of U-boats in the channels between
Spitzbergen and Norway. Our covering forces,
on the other hand, if they entered these waters,
would’ be without shore-based air support, one
thousand miles from their base, with their
destroyers too short of fuel to escort a damaged
ship to harbour.
