1978

made its decisive crossing of the Irrawaddy
below Mandalay, another Beaufighter located
some fifty vehicles all moving eastwards along
the Chauk—Meiktila highway.

91. A little later, on the night of the
27th/28th, a Mitchell on intruder patrol dis-
covered a convoy of over a hundred vehicles,
together with some armoured cars and six
tanks, travelling northwards along the road
from Taungdwingyi to Myothit, doubtless to
be thrown into the attempt to stem the advance
of the Fourteenth Army. The aircraft delivered
attacks by both bombing and strafing for the
space of an hour. It then attacked another
smaller group of vehicles some distance to the
south-east, after which it returned to the large
convoy and was able to observe that some forty
units had been knocked out by its previous
attacks ; finally it delivered one more strafing
attack, setting three more vehicles on fire.

92. In the second half of April, with the final
stages of the advance southwards in progress,
such targets became unprecedentedly plentiful.
A Hurricane squadron, for instance, caught
over forty vehicles on the 19th standing nose
to tail, heavily loaded and camouflaged, off the
road a little south of Pyinmana, and was: sub-
sequently able to count seventeen in fiames and
many more severely damaged. The same
squadron located an even larger number near
the site of the bridge over the Sittang at Mok-
palin on the 30th, when a total of forty-three
lorries finally was counted in flames. Both
Mustangs of the Second Air Commando Group
and Beaufighters of 224 Group had each al-
Teady made a haul similar in size and nature in
this escape corridor on the 26th. In all, during
this second half of the month, approximately
three hundred and fifty motor vehicles were
successfully attacked behind the enemy’s lines
throughout Burma. The analogous figures for
the whole period covered by this despatch may
conservatively be assessed, on the basis of vis-
ible evidence, at 3846 M.T. vehicles.

93. One operation in tactical support of the
Fourteenth Army is worthy of special mention,
namely the achievement of a Hurricane IID
squadron, firing rocket projectiles, which on
February 19th—in the course of a single day—
put out of action twelve tanks which the Japan-
ese were about to throw into the battle for the
bridgehead opposite Myinmu. These belonged
to the single tank regiment of which
the Japanese forces in Burma were known to
dispose, and it was a measure of the importance
attached by the enemy to the outcome of the
struggle in the Myinmu bridgehead that he now
sought to commit them in the field for the first
time since they had been withdrawn from the
Imphal front in the previous June. They were,

however, destroyed before they came within ©

range of infantry weapons, their destruction
being shortly afterwards verified by advancing
Allied troops who inspected their remains,

94. Somewhat different in character from the
harassing of Japanese road communication was
the interdiction of the railways used by the
enemy in supplying his troops in Burma.
Already, before the opening of the period cov-
ered by this despatch, the operation of ground-
attack fighter aircraft over these lines had
become a difficult and expensive undertaking.
Trains had practically ceased to run by day,

SUPPLEMENT to THE LONDON GAZETTE, 12 APRIL, 1931

their component parts generally being camou-
flaged and dispersed until sunset with the loco-
motives hidden in specially constructed shelters,
often at the end of long sidings deep in the
jungle. All obvious railway targets were
guarded by efficient anti-aircraft defences,
dummy or derelict locomotives being placed to
decoy the aircraft into traps or at least to draw
their fire. Nevertheless, some three hundred
and ten locomotives were successfully attacked
by day, Beaufighters accounting for one hun-
dred and eighty-seven. Most of the remainder
were claimed by Mosquitos, Mustangs,
Lightnings and Thunderbolts.

95. Of the number of rolling stock destroyed
it would be unsafe to give any estimate, but
in any case there were always more than
enough waggons available in Burma to satisfy
Japanese military needs—in contrast to the
position in regard to locomotives, which, as a
result of past Allied air attacks were always
in short supply, the Japanese going so far as to
import them from Siam and to use petrol-
driven cars to haul railway waggons. Water-
towers always presented a vulnerable target,
difficult to hide, and thirty-nine were holed
during the period. It should be noted that these
day attacks by ground-attack fighters reached
as far as the northern extremities of both the
Burma-Siam and the Bangkok-Chiengmai rail-
ways.

96. A further one hundred and twenty-two
locomotives were put out of commission as a
result of night attacks, thirty-seven being con-
tributed by Mosquitos and thirty-seven by
Mitchells. These attacks were of course
delivered upon trains in full employment, and
were not infrequently accompanied by spectacu-
lar results, with engine boilers exploding,
trucks aflame and a series of secondary ex-
plosions. They may be reckoned as having
inflicted greater material injury upon the enemy
than a numerical comparison between the
numbers of locomotives damaged by day and
by night would suggest.

97. Concurrently with attacks upon locomo-
tives, key points in the Burmese railway system,
such as the junctions at Thazi and Pyinmana,
were bombed, mainly by Mitchells and Light-
nings. But the main weight of attack con-
‘tinued ito be directed upon bridges, which
were so numerous that it was impossible to
provide anti-aircraft defences for more than the
most important. The enemy pursued his estab-
lished policy of erecting by-pass trestle bridges
to serve as temporary substitutes for the per-
manent structures wrecked or menaced by air
attack.

98. In all, about three hundred bridges were
put out of commission by medium, light and
fighter bombers ; of this total, one hundred and
twelve were railway bridges. So great, how-
ever, was the success of the bridge destruction
policy, that in connection with the unexpectedly
rapid advance of the Fourteenth Army it pro-
voked the query whether we were not destroy-
ing our own future land line of communication
in advance, and agreement was reached by
which, from February onwards, the indis-
criminate destruction of bridges was abandoned
in favour of a policy of keeping specified
major bridges unserviceable. When, in course
of time, the sites were occupied by Allied
