SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 12 APRIL, 1951

‘or aircraft on strength. Moreover it was con-
sistent practice for the Army to require full
data on the performance of our aircraft and
explanations for any short-fall that might
occur, while never giving equivalent informa-
tion upon their own short-fall in overland
or inland water transport.

73. Air supply depends on so many agencies,
and is affected by so many imponderables, that
the allocation of resources and good brains to
ensure efficiency, speed and good liaison can
never be too generous. The campaign in
Burma would have been rendered easier had
the engineering resources that were poured into
less profitable projects been directed towards
timely building of forward airfields, more effi-
cient supply depots and stronger lines of com-
munication to the air haulage centres. The
Ledo Road, for example, is surely the longest
white elephant in the world. Had the wealth
of ability and material that went to its building
been employed in strengthening the air supply
system, the recapture of Burma could probably
have been advanced by an appreciable period.

* * * *

Part Five.

TACTICAL SUPPORT OF THE
GROUND FORCES.

The Organisation of Tactical Support.

74. Air forces operating in tactical support
of the Allied Land Forces in Burma comprised
Nos. 221 and 224 Groups R.A.F. and 10th
U.S.A.A.F. all under the command of Head-
quarters, Eastern Air Command. Each worked
in close association with a corresponding army
headquarters—the Tenth U.S.A.A-F. with the
Northern Combat Area Command, 224 Group
with 15 Corps and 221 Group with 33 Corps
and 4 Corps, and finally from the beginning
of December onwards with the Fourteenth
Army. 221 Group and Fourteenth Army
remained together at Imphal only until the
end of December, when the latter moved for-
ward to Kalemyo, being accompanied by the
A.O.C. and his air staff.. The two headquarters
were again united fully at Monywa from 9th
February until the middle of April, when they
moved to Meiktila, their final staging post
before Rangoon. The mobility of 221 Group
headquarters had a less active counterpart in
that of 224 Group, which remained with the
headquarters of 15 Corps first at Cox’s Bazar
and later at Akyab. In both cases the close
relationship of the headquarters of the two
Services was an essential element in their
successful co-operation.

75. In the campaign in central Burma, just
as all the ground forces came under the
Fourteenth Army, so all the aircraft engaged
in close, as distinct from tactical, support of
the former were controlled by Headquarters,
221 Group. There were however two excep-
tions. The two Air Commando Groups
operated directly under Eastern Air Command,
and the Mustangs of the Second Air Com-
mando Group, which played so important a
role in the operations of 4 Corps which led
to the seizure of Meiktila, were for the crucial
period of these operations controlled by an
advanced headquarters of the Combat Cargo
Task Force located with 4 Corps headquarters,

1975

The second exception was provided by the
Thunderbolt squadrons of 905 Wing, for which,
owing to administrative reasons, there was no
room east of the Lushai Hills and which were
therefore located in Arakan under 224 Group.

76. In this connection the very difficult
problems of administration confronting 221
Group must be recalled. Its wings and squad-
rons operated from bases covering a front of
some two hundred miles, and a depth which
at the beginning of the campaigning season in
November was no less, and which by the end
of April had expanded to some six hundred
miles, from the Mosquito wing at Khumbigram
to the fighter squadrons on forward strips near
Toungoo. Most were on a highly mobile basis,
with personnel reduced to the minimum ; the
separation of squadrons from servicing
echelons which was generally effected towards
the end of 1944 contributed materially to the
mobility of units in the group. Fighter squad-
rons moved forward in pace with the advancing
front as quickly as the army were able to
prepare landing grounds and forego air trans-
port for them ; the squadrons of 906 Wing, for
instance, were operating from airfields near
Ye-U by the middle of January, a fortnight
after the occupation of the district by 33 Corps,
and before the end of April no less than nine
fighter squadrons were located at Toungoo,
which had not been captured until the 22nd,
and another four at Magwe, which fell on the
18th, in preparation for the assault upon
Rangoon. These moves were effected with the
aid of transport aircraft, overland communica-
tions being almost non-existent. There was,
however, some feeling among the squadrons
that in the matter of motor transport and
indeed of supplies generally the army was at
a distinct advantage.

77. The enormous area over which the
squadrons of 221 Group were scattered, together
with the meagreness of communications by
Jand and telephone, also precluded the whole-
sale adoption, for the operational control of
fighter aircraft in close support, of the organiza-
tion which had been evolved in the European
theatre of war for army-air co-operation. The
former system of Army Air Support Units
was replaced in the closing months of 1944
by the establishment of Air Support Signals
Units with Visual Control Posts (V-C.Ps.), Air
Advisers being also provided for both corps
and divisional headquarters. A Combined
Army /Air School for training V.C.P personnel
was set up at Ranchi, and it was soon found
that the greatest difficulty in the establishment
of Visual Control Posts was the provision of
personnel, particularly of Controllers, who it
was agreed must be chosen from experienced
junior officers of the General Duties branch.
Ten teams were however operating by the
end of 1944 and by the beginning of May,
1945, their number had risen to thirty-four.
The special value of the V.C.Ps lay in the
extra flexibility and accuracy which they lent
to air operations planned in conjunction with
the ground situation; the former device of
jndicating targets by smoke shells, always
liable to inaccuracies in both place and time
as well as to counterfeiting by the enemy,
was now needed only when the target lay
in flat jungle country, invisible from the air
and not determinable in relation to any obvious
feature of the landscape.
