1984

crease during November was considered as a
parting shot of little weight and trifling import-
ance. As an explanation of this it is reasonable
to assume that American aggressiveness in the
China Seas and the Pacific was absorbing the
attention of Japan, as was the European war
the attention of Germany. Thus the expected
threat did not develop but rather declined, and
as a consequence the need for an over-all
centralised control as vested in the organisation
of IOGROPS diminished with the declining U-
boat threat.

* %* * *

Offensive General Reconnaissance.

138. The second half of the twelve months
under review opened with No. 222 Group still
being primarily concerned in supplementing the
hunting and striking powers of the East Indies
Fleet in anti-U-boat warfare. But it was be-
coming apparent that the U-boat threat no
longer existed. Therefore, in the due con-
sideration of alternative employment was con-
ceived the undertaking of an offensive role. The
mining of enemy waters in the Malacca Straits
and the Chumphorn, Singora, Padang, Singa-
pore areas; anti-shipping operations to deny
the waters of the Andaman Sea to enemy ship-
ping—this was to be the future employment
of General Reconnaissance aircraft.

139. Mining operations were the first to
commence, on the 2ist January. From that
date until 3rd May, 1945, 833 mines have been
carried to enemy waters by No. 160 Squadron,
the high percentage of 86.9 being successfully
laid. The success of these operations, although
not immediately apparent, will be revealed with
the broadening of the operational scene in this
theatre.

140. Only a short period of training was
necessary to prepare No. 354 Squadron for
its new assignment of low-level anti-shipping
strikes, which were commenced early in Febru-
ary. A second Liberator squadron—No. 203—
began to augment the anti-shipping effort in
March. A statistical summary of the material
damage inflicted as a result of these operations
proves that these two squadrons played no
small part in complicating the enemy’s acute
problem of shipping shortage.

* * * *

The Development and Control of Offensive
General Reconnaissance.

141. The last four months had seen General
Reconnaissance changing the nature of its
operational function with deftness and adapt-
ability, The reinforcement and development of
this new offensive role was envisaged during
March, when No. 346 Wing was formed at
Akyab, to provide escort for “forward area”
convoys and to make easily available a strik-
ing force against enemy shipping off the Arakan
and Burmese Coasts.

142. One squadron of Sunderland aircraft
based on the depot ship S.S. “ Manela ” consti-
tuted a significant part of 346 Wing. This
vessel ultimately proceeded from Colombo to
Rangoon via Akyab, and her advent to these
waters was an important milestone in offensive
General Reconnaissance. Should a situation
develop wherein it was necessary to conduct
anti-shipping and similar operations in a

SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 12 APRIL, 1951

theatre where the scene of operations might be
constantly and rapidly changing (with a conse-
quent paucity of adequate land-bases) then
a mobile flying boat base would be an invalu-
able asset. If this situation did not develop,
then the inherent mobility of such a unit could
be usefully adapted to the requirements of Air
Sea Rescue and Transport operations, where,
as always, the lack of immediate land-bases
establishes a major problem.

143. The period closed on an encouraging
note. General Reconnaissance had already
struck a worthwhile blow at enemy shipping,
and plans were in hand for an intensifying
of these operations in the months to come. In
considering the strategic plan of anti-shipping
sorties, mention should be made of the invalu-
able contribution of those General Recon-
naissance Liberator and Mosquito aircraft
based on Ceylon, in their day and night photo-
graphic reconnaissance over the Andamans,
Nicobar Islands, Northern Sumatra and parts of
Malaya. Meteorological flights were also flown
regularly, and materially assisted weather fore-
casts for aircraft flying over vast expanses of
water.

* . * * *
Part NINE

ADMINISTRATIVE AND OTHE!
ASPECTS

@ Administration.

144. Administrative development of Air
Command, South East Asia, during the year
was dictated by the following factors :—

(@ The move of Command Headquarters
to Kandy.

Gi) The need for identifying group ad-
ministrative areas inside India with the
geographical boundaries of the Indian Army
Command.

(iii) The traditional problem of adminis-
tering units spread over vast areas with in-
sufficient resources.

(iv) The desirability of removing from
operational formations extraneous adminis-
trative burdens.

{v) The necessity for providing operational
units with greater mobility. .

(vi) The planning of the administrative
network to sustain and control units advan-
cing into Burma.

(vii) The formation of new units in antici-
pation of future operations, while hardly
meeting present commitments with existing
resources in manpower and material.

(viii) The development on an unpre-
cedented scale of air supply for the Allied
forces advancing into Burma.

145. The primary British interests in South
East Asia were the re-conquest of Burma, the
Federated Malay States and Singapore, the
Netherland East Indies, Thailand and French
Indo-China. British air responsibilities in South
East Asia also included the air defence of
India and of Allied shipping in the Indian
‘Ocean, the Arabian Sea and the Bay of Ben-
gal. With these somewhat diverse objectives
