1966

enable the primary tasks of the Command, the
re-opening of the land route to China and the
clearance of Burma, to be accomplished.

6. The dry-weather campaign which was
drawing to a close had brought few positive
Tesults. ‘Only in the north-east had any terri-
torial gains been made, and here General
Stilwell’s forces had cleared the Hukawng
Valley and were in possession of Myitkyina
airfield. In the Fourteenth Army sector,
Imphal was still invested, though 33 Corps was
driving the Japanese from the Kohima-Imphal
road, and 4 Corps was attacking the Japanese
in the Imphal plain. In Arakan, although
one enemy offensive had been frustrated, the
Japanese still held the Mayu peninsula and the
tice port of Akyab. The other British forces
operating on the offensive were the long-range
penetration groups of Special Force.

7. The Air Forces, having just completed
a period of intensive operations, were envisag-
ing some retrenchment, a “ reculer pour mieux
sauter”. An extensive programme of re-
equipment was in train which would convert
nine squadrons of Hurricanes to Thunderbolts,
the two Wellington squadrons to Liberators,
and four squadrons of Vengeances to
Mosquitos. The relative sparsity of all-
weather airfields in the forward areas entailed
a withdrawal of these squadrons to bases in
India for their conversion, and the monsoon
campaign was undertaken with a total of 17
squadrons out of the line, re-equipping, resting
or training. Having regard to the nature of
mionsoon conditions and of the fighting in pro-
gress, the forces remaining in the line were
ample, nor indeed could any more be deployed.
The net result was that the air component con-
ducting tactical operations that culminated on
all three sectors in the capture of springboards
for a dry-weather assault, was a moderate,
well-balanced force of experienced squadrons,
versed in the ready identification of jungle
targets and trained in close co-operation with
the formations whom they were supporting.

* * * *

Plans for 1944-5 Operations.

8. The broad mission of S.E.A.C. was formu-
lated at the Octagon conferences as . . . “ the
destruction or expulsion of all Japanese forces
in Burma at the earliest date. Operations to
achieve this object must not however prejudice
the security of the existing air supply to China,
including the air staging post at Myitkyina and
the opening of overland communications with

ina”.

9. The plans that were prepared to this end
during the monsoon of 1944 envisaged an
elaborate series of airborne assaults that did
not appreciate the reliability and self-sufficiency
of an army supplied unstintingly from the air.
Indeed, had it then been suggested that
Rangoon could be reached by an army travel-
ling overland and supplied largely by air, the
proposal would not have received serious con-
sideration. The overall strategy can best be
judged from the four main plans which were
formulated during the 1944 monsoon :—

(i) Plan “X” involved an overland
advance from the Mogaung-Myitkyina area
to Katha and Bhamo, co-ordinated with

‘

SUPPLEMENT to tHe LONDON GAZETTE, 12 APRIL, 1951

another advance from Imphal to the Chind-
win and an airborne operation in the
vicinity of Wuntho. The furthest penetra-
tion that was envisaged was the occupation
of territory north of a line stretching between
Kalewa and Lashio.

Gi) Plan “Y” intended to employ air-
borne troops in the seizure of Kalewa, and
a second air landing at the point of debouch-
ment into the Mandalay plain to exploit the
confusion that would be caused.

ii) Plan “Z” entailed an airborne
iassault in strength with all transport aircraft
in the theatre immediately north of Rangoon,
to capture the city.

{iv) General Stilwell’s plan was for British
forces to press forward towards Shwebo-
Mandalay, while N.C.A.C.* profited by the
diversion to occupy Bhamo, whence they
could mount an airborne operation to
capture Lashio.

10. The part that the Air Forces were to
play in these operations was given in an Opera-
tional Directive in which the order of priorities
was interesting, putting as it did close support
and transport operations very low in the scale.
In the event, a reorientation of tasks took place
which gave greater emphasis to the work of
close support and air supply. The results of
such a shift in the centre of gravity to a machine
geared to the classical form of air warfare in-
volved changes in organisation, control, supply
and maintenance which are discussed at more
length in the appropriate context.

11. Plans “ Y” and “Z” were approved in
principle by the Chiefs of Staff in July and
August, and called “ Capital” and “ Dracula ”
Tespectively. In point of fact, however, opera-
tions in Central Burma progressed more
quickly than anticipated. ‘Continually out-
fianked by Allied forces, to whom the manna
of air supply gave an unprecedented degree
of mobility, and continually harried by our
close support aircraft, the enemy was never
allowed to consolidate the new positions that
he occupied along the line of his retreat. Thus
by January, the airborne aspect of “ Capital”
had been rendered unnecessary, a fact which
caused great relief to the Allied Commanders,
for it was increasingly evident that the trans-
port aircraft to train for and launch the opera-
tion, scheduled for mid-February, would be
difficult to find from, existing resources.

12. Operation “Dracula” was to be the
greatest airborne operation yet conceived, in-
volving a fly-in over a distance of 480 miles
by some 900 transport aircraft and 650 gliders.
The necessity for retaining these forces in
Europe, and their high attrition rate in opera-
tions there, precluded their re-deployment in
this theatre as planned, and in October
“Dracula” was postponed with the prospect
of not being mounted until the winter of
1945-46.

13. The emphasis now lay on Central Burma.
Operations. An advance to the Monywa-
Mandalay area was considered to be the
furthest point that could be reached before the
1945 monsoon. Exploitation further south
was not thought to be practicable in view of
the difficulties of supply. In the event, the

* Northern Combat Area Command.
