1988

This is particularly so in those areas vacated by
the advancing tactical groups, and extra pro-
vision must continually be made to administer
those formations left in the backwash of the
advance. It has even been necessary to graft
additional administrative responsibilities on to
the air supply group in the forward areas
(No. 232), for lack of personnel to set up the
requisite administrative framework. The con-
flicting factors of function and distance have
called for an organization far more complex
than would be the case in a more compact
theatre. For this the only solution is a realiza-
tion at home that additional personnel and
transport facilities to maintain India as a base,
and conduct an energetic campaign in Malaya
and beyond, must be allotted on a more
generous scale than previously.

* * * *

(I) Maintenance. :

172. The maintenance organisation in South
East Asia embraces supply, servicing, repair
and salvage of all air force material in India,
Ceylon and Burma ; an area approximately the
size of Europe. It was realised at an early
stage that it was impossible to have the same
maintenance system operating throughout the
Command, since the extensive topographical
diversities encountered necessitated that the
ultimate systems adopted be dictated by the
geography of the country. Broadly speaking,
therefore, one system applies in Ceylon and
India as far eastwards as the Brahmaputra,
and an entirely different one was evolved to
operate throughout Assam and Burma. In
the former area conditions are more or less
static, the ground communications, although
greatly inferior to those of Europe, are reason-
ably good with no considerable land or water
barriers. ‘Here, a large and efficient base
maintenance organisation has been built up
which provides adequate backing for the air
forces far beyond the Brahmaputra ; it is in
this base area that the Base Repair Depots,
Equipment Depots and Aircraft Storage Units
are to be found. In Assam and Burma, how-
ever, the situation bears a vastly different
appearance, patsimonious communications
from Calcutta to the railhead at Dimapur and
thence by road over the Naga and Chin Hills
to Central Burma prohibited the use of a main-
tenance organisation which was possible in
England and which, to a limited degree, has
also been found possible in India.

173. From the time of the siege of Imphal
to the capture of Rangoon, air lift, the prin-
cipal means of supply to our combat Army and
Air Force formations, was restricted to essen-
tial needs and could not be provided to support
avoidable maintenance at forward airfields.
As a result, a policy was agreed of flying air-
craft back to India for comparatively simple
servicing requirements such as periodical
inspections and engine changes. This obviated
the necessity for flying spare engines and to
some extent, equipment and spares, into the
forward areas; at the same time it increased
the mobility of squadrons and reduced their
maintenance personnel requirements. Aircraft
which crashed away from airfields had
normally to be written off charge, while those
which crashed on airfields, provided the
damage was not too great, were repaired on

SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 12 APRIL, 1951

the site. Surface movement back to India
was restricted to a minimum, since damage to
an aircraft during transit in this part of the
world is normally so great that it is beyond
economical repair on arrival at its destination.
On occasions, damaged fighter aircraft were
dismantled and flown back to India, the
servicing personnel becoming so expert that
they were able to pack the whole of a fighter
aircraft and its components into one Dakota
fuselage.

174. Owing to the speed and intensity at
which the campaign was being fought, and the
vital need to capture the strategic base of
Rangoon before the onset of the monsoon, I
decided that all the normal rates of effort must
Ge exceeded, and all our Air Force resources
were thrown into the battle. During one
month of 1945, no less than 700 aircraft passed
through the Aircraft Storage Units and
Reserve Aircraft Pools in order to provide
replacements for the 75 squadrons operating
east of Calcutta. During the early stages of
the campaign, the small number of combat
losses introduced a major maintenance com-
plication, since low wastage rates, giving air-
craft a long life, placed upon the repair
organisation a storage commitment which had
not been foreseen. A further strain was
caused by severe deterioration owing to
climatic conditions, such as to subject aircraft
to monsoon rains accompanied by sudden
bursts of sunshine. This had an adverse effect
upon the timber, fabric, rubber and electrical
parts of aircraft. In the autumn of 1944, for
instance, Mosquito aircraft had to be grounded
as a result of such defects, until extensive re-
pairs had been effected.

175. The maintenance organisation in the
forward areas consisted of the Repair and Sal-
vage Units (R. and S.U.) supporting squadrons
at their airfields, and taking on all work which
the flying units could not complete within forty-
eight hours. Air Stores Parks held sufficient
stocks of spares and equipment for three
months supply, and the Forward Repair Depots
which were located far enough forward to
undertake major inspections and repairs beyond
R. & S.U. capacity. In addition Motor Trans-
port Light Repair Depots were deployed in
the forward areas, and the importance of their
work can be measured by the fact that in traver-
sing the tortuous line of communication from
Calcutta through Dimapur and Imphal to
central Burma, mechanical transport vehicles
had expended the major part of their useful
lives before reaching their destination. Thus
a great deal of ingenuity and inventiveness on
the part of M/T servicing personnel was neces-
sary in order to keep vehicles running, vehicles
which in base areas would have been scrapped.

176. The maintenance effort in Burma can
best be summarized as a triumph of improvisa-
tion to overcome bad climate and worse ter-
rain, the paucity of spares, tools and equipment
which was designed for the European theatre
of war and not designed to be flown over,
driven through or manhandled in the cruel
country of Assam and Burma. The overload-
ing of home production, and the overriding
need to finish off the western war first, were
adequate reasons for this situation, and the
maintenance effort during the period which cul-
minated in the capture of Rangoon was very
