SUPPLEMENT to tus LONDON GAZETTE, 12 APRIL, 1951

13th January against Mandalay, the keystone
of the whole Japanese defensive system in
central Burma and directly threatened in two
directions by the advance of the Fourteenth
Amy. Fifty-four aircraft attacked the
Japanese-occupied district and a further 12 the
suburb of Sagaing on the opposite side of the
tiver, the operation being preceded by attacks
by Thunderbolts upon anti-aircraft gun sites
in the neighbourhood, and accompanied by
fighter sweeps over the airfields at Aungban
and Meiktila. Photographic evidence con-
firmed the destruction of some 70 major build-
ings in the Japanese quarters, while intelligence
reports variously estimated Japanese casualties
alone at 600 and a 1,000, in addition to those
inflicted upon Burmese puppet troops. ~

85. Such operations undertaken at the
request of the Allied land forces reached their
zenith in February, during which month nearly
two thirds of the total number of sorties flown
by Liberators of the Strategic Air Force were
directed against targets in or near the battle-
front as requested by the Fourteenth Army.
These included, for instance, the stores dumps
near the railhead at Madaya, from which the
enemy forces fighting to contain the Singu
bridgehead were supplied, which was attacked
by forty-five heavy bomber aircraft, and the
gafrison districts at Yenangyaung, which were
attacked by 50. (Later in the month, heavy
bomber targets included objectives designated
by the Army at Myittha, Mablaing and
Myingyan—all towns lying on or close to the
path being followed by the armoured columns
of 4 Corps in their thrust towards Meiktila.
To take a final example, the climax of the air
attacks upon the potential stronghold of
Toungoo, where the enemy was expected to
make a serious effort to stop the drive of
4 Corps southwards towards Rangoon in the
second half of April, was supplied by over 40
Liberators, which bombed the garrison area
there on the 21st, when the nearest Allied
troops were already within striking distance,
and indeed entered the town the following day.

86. Very effective operations against targets
in the immediate rear of the enemy were
carried out by ground-attack fighters through-
out the period ; their most vulnerable objec-
tives were to be found along the lines of

communication, where animal and motor trans- .

port units were carrying to his troops in the
field, and also along the waterways where mis-
cellaneous rivercraft served the same purpose.
In these operations varied aircraft were em-
ployed, from Hurricanes and Spitfires to
Beaufighters, Lightnings, Thunderbolts and
Mosquitos, while Mitchells also participated,
particularly by night. Armament included
rocket projectiles and bombs, as well as 40 mm.
cannon, also guns of lesser calibre.

87. Some small foretaste of the weight and
pattern of this tactical support of the army
was given in July, when the enemy was
endeavouring to withdraw from the perimeter
of the Imphal plain, and good toll was taken
of his transport forced to brave the open road
to Tiddim and the other routes eastward to
the Chindwin. Direct attacks upon vehicles,
mainly by Hurricanes, were varied by success-
ful efforts to block the Tiddim road by causing
landslides, and to break the bridges both along
it and in the Kabaw Valley—achievements for

1977

which Lightnings and Vengeances were respon-
sible. In all, over 75 motor transport units
were successfully attacked in this area during
the month. These operations, though invisible
to the army, were controlled with the military
situation always in view, and evidence was sub-
sequently forthcoming in plenty from captured
diaries of enemy officers and men of their effec-
tiveness in hindering the passage of supplies
and the movement of personnel, and in aggra-
vating the conditions of disease and under-
nourishment under which the Japanese ground
forces laboured.

88. In August the tactical picture on the
Fourteenth Army front came to centre round
the Chindwin river, which for two or three
weeks became of considerably enhanced im-
portance as a supply route. It had long been
in use by the Japanese as a line of communi-
cation, and the riverine ports, particularly
Monywa and Kalewa, were active points of
supply. The still worsening military situation
continued to impose upon the enemy the neces-
sity for emergency movements of men and sup-
plies behind the Manipur sector of the front.
Since the capacity of the Sagaing—Ye-U rail-
way had been greatly reduced by air action,
and the other overland routes were more or
less unusable owing to the monsoon, they were
forced to have increased resort to the Chind-
win as a line of communication.

89. Early in the month the toll of rivercraft
successfully attacked began to increase and it
became apparent that something was afoot.
The Spitfires and Hurricanes which had hitherto
been covering the river were reinforced by a
detachment of Beaufighters from 224 Group.
“ Hurribombers ” were joined by Wellingtons,
and later by Mitchells, in a series of attacks
upon riverside targets. In addition, mines, both
magnetic and ordinary, were laid in the Chind-
win by Mitchells so as to catch traffic attempt-
ing to move under cover either of cloud or
darkness. The total number of rivercraft suc-
cessfully attacked on the Chindwin during the
month was not far short of five hundred, and
included seven launches ; of this total the Beau-
fighters accounted for slightly over half,
together with five of the launches.

90. Attacks upon road transport vehicles con-
tinued throughout the campaign, their effective-
ness being increased with the advent of better
weather at the close of the monsoon. In par-
ticular, the periods during which a major Allied
advance was in progress and the battlefront was
therefore fluid, were marked by the presence
of transport targets in otherwise unusual quan-
tity. This was.so during the advance to the
Irrawaddy in December, the thrust towards
Meiktila during late February and early in

» March, and above all during the final advance

of 4 Corps towards Rangoon in the second half
of April. Ox-carts belonging to the local popu-
lation had long been habitually pressed into
service by the Japanese, and were attacked at
all times. But lorries moved mainly under
cover of darkness, and the Beaufighters which
lit upon a convoy of forty to fifty vehicles
travelling westwards along the road from
Meiktila to Kyaukpadaung on the afternoon of
February 5th and successfully strafed them made
an exceptional discovery. But it was probably
no coincidence that on the night of February
15th/ 16th, just after the Fourteenth Army had
