SUPPLEMENT To Taz LONDON GAZETTE, 12 APRIL, 1951

This measure was brought to its logical con-
clusion by the formation of No. 228 Group
in February, 1945, to provide functional and/
or administrative control of ail units of Base
Air Forces within the area of Eastern (Army)
Command, and to provide R.A.F. administrative
services within that area. As Eastern (Army)
Command extends its boundaries to the Burma
frontier, the area of responsibility of No. 228
Group will expand. R.A-F. India is thus split
up between four administrative and training
groups.

* * * *

Introduction of Wing H.Q. and Servicing
Echelon Organisation.

163. In the Far East more than in the
metropolitan air force, the administrative
problems confronting junior operational com-
manders are such as to hinder them in the
performance of their primary tasks. In recog-
nition of this and to improve the mobility and
flexibility of the wing organisation, it was
decided to introduce the principle of wing
headquarters and servicing echelons for single-
engined and light twin-engined aircraft. The
scheme came into effect by the end of Sep-
tember, 1944, with the wing headquarters based
on certain major airfields, and the servicing
echelons became responsible for the upkeep
of the squadron aircraft. The squadrons were
thereby relieved of the responsibility for their
own administration and most of their first-line
maintenance.

164. In anticipation of a more mobile kind
of warfare, it became necessary in December,
1944, to remove the geographical restriction
implied by naming the wing according to its
current location. The wings were accordingly
given numbers, and their attitude to mobility
thus greatly enhanced, as evidenced by the
advance of No. 906 Wing from Imphal to
Rangoon in six months, in a series of well-
organized moves. The scheme has been
successful, and its principle has been extended
to other squadrons in order to centralize control
of resources and administration and to
economise in overheads.

165. Perhaps one factor has marred full
advantage being taken of the inherent mobility
and flexibility which the organisation would
afford. The provision of more servicing
echelons than squadrons would allow of peak
periods of operational effort at very short
notice from advance airfields, for an additional
servicing echelon could be flown in to supple-
ment the existing maintenance personnel. This
lesson was learned at Akyab where the provi-
dential presence of a servicing commando
allowed of a much higher rate of effort from
the island during the early days of the occupa-
tion than would otherwise have been possible.

* * * *

The Manpower Situation.

166. The Command has been continually
hampered by an ill-balanced allotment of man-
power, whereby shortages have been concen-
trated in certain vital trades, rendering the
administrative machine extremely difficult to
operate efficiently.

1987

167. In June, 1944, the establishment and
strength of the Command for ground British
personnel were as follows:—

Establish- Strength Shortage

ment
Officers 6,277 5,170 1,107
Other 1anks ... 88,636 80,967 7,669
94,913 86,137 8,776

The deficiency of 18 per cent. in ground
officers was concentrated principally in such
important branches as Admin. G., Tech. (E),
Code and Cypher and the like. The airman
deficiency of 9 per cent. more seriously affected
the clerical trades.

168. By May, 1945, the position had
changed, but not improved, as the following
figures and illustrations will show:— .

Establish- Strength Shortage

ment or

Surplus

Officers 8,103 7,573 530
Shortage

Other ranks ... 105,470 110,459 = 4,989
Surplus

Total 113,573 118,032 4,459
Surplus

169. The 64 per cent. deficiency in ground
officers affects principally the following
branches, Admin., Code and Cyphers, Tech.
@), Catering, etc. The shortages in the
Technical Branch have caused particular
difficulty. The overall 5 per cent. surplus in
airmen does not give a true picture of the
situation, for there are very serious deficiencies
in clerical and domestic personnel which are
hampering the development of the Command.”
Clerks G/D are below establishment by no
Jess than 36 per cent., Equipment Assistants by
29 per cent. and Cooks by 28 per cent. The
surplus was concentrated in the technical
trades and amounted to 7,100. Such a surplus
was more of a liability than an asset, since it
created additional work for the already over-
burdened administrative and domestic per-
sonnel and could not be used to offset the
shortages elsewhere.

170. Since February, 1945, very strenuous
efforts have been made to disband redundant
units and prune such establishments as can
conceivably be reduced. The diminishing air
threat to the east coast of India and Ceylon
has made it possible to thin out the early warn-
ing Radar system, and considerable economies
have been effected. Much has been done to
distribute the shortages where they could more
easily be borne, and it was Command policy
to make the strongest where it was most
effective, that was nearest to the enemy.

* * * .

Conclusion.

171. The administrative network covering
the vastness of India is now as complete and
rational as present resources allow. It cannot
be said, however, that the administrative
problems of the Command are now solved. As
the armies advance, the area to be controlled
grows, and the net is in many places thin.
