1990

likewise landed at airstrips as close as possible
to troops in the line. Allied transport aircraft
were often being unloaded on captured airfields
within a few hours of their being seized. But
as the army units advanced, it frequently proved
impossible, despite the presence of enemy
troops lurking in the neighbourhood, to leave
garrisons behind to protect the airfields they
had overrun. The defence of the latter thus
fell to the squadrons of the R.A.F. Regiment.
On their shoulders there thus rested the defence
of the army lifeline and also of the air bases
indispensable for air support and defence, and
they were accordingly moved forward step by
step with the progress of the campaign, some-
times by air.

185. The main airfield at Meiktila for in-
Stance, was occupied early in March, 1944, and
was speedily transformed into a forward base
for the supply of the Fourteenth Army, whose

units had forged ahead both southwards and .

eastwards, leaving numerous organised parties
of the enemy in their rear. The defence of the
airfield thus fell mainly upon two field squad-
rons of the R.A.F. Regiment, which went into
action on a number of occasions against
Japanese parties attempting to dig themselves in
within the airfield perimeter. For a short
period indeed, the landing strip used to change
hands twice daily, the enemy infiltrating by
night only to be expelled the next morning
when, as soon as all was clear, the transport
aircraft would begin to land. The Regiment
casualties in the course of these engagements
included two officers and twelve other ranks

a“

* * * *

Part TEN.
CONCLUSIONS, RESULTS, AND LESSONS
LEARNED.

I. Operations.

186. One of the major difficulties under which
an Air Force works, is the impracticability of
ever drawing up a full balance-sheet which will
give in detail the full results of air action. Un-
less a detailed examination of enemy records is
made, air forces must rely upon the dis-
jointed accounts of the ground forces, the re-
ports of informants, and photographic recon-
naissance, for an assessment of their results.
This has been particularly the case in Burma,
where so much of the effort has been expended
upon fleeting targets, reported troop concentra-
tions, or objectives obscured by thick jungle.
Notwithstanding the vagueness of the informa-
tion, it is certain that the number of casualties
inflicted upon the enemy as a direct result of
air action has undoubtedly been large, the
isolation of the battlefield by the interdiction of
the supply lines has been almost complete,
and prevented the enemy from deploying his
full strength in every major engagement that
has taken place, while the new mobility given
to armies by the unstinting use of air transport
has undoubtedly been the major factor in the
expulsion of the enemy from Burma.

187. There have at times been grounds for a
belief that the effort of our close support
squadrons has not been used to full advantage
because of a lack of experience on the part of

SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 12 APRIL, 1951

Army commanders of the relative efficacy of
certain types of air attack against the varied
objectives. A more scientific application of
the fire-power afforded by ground-attack air-
craft might have led to an economy of effort
thus made available to apply to other targets.
Whether the attack by twelve fighter-bombers
against a well-camouflaged single machine-gun
ig justifiable, must always be a moot point
until machinery is devised to assess the debit
and credit side of the picture. It is not diffi-
cult in a staff study to deduce that the effort
is unprofitable, but the same point of view
may not be held by the troops making the
actual assault. The results of the air bombard-
ment may be just what was needed to make the
action successful. It is certain that the high
standard of accuracy developed in our tactical
squadrons during 1944-45 has had an enormous
effect upon enemy resistance.

188. The low incidence of casualties during
assaults by our own troops also bears this
out, as do the unvarying tributes paid by
battalions and divisions to the work of the
squadrons who supported them. Recently,
further evidence has come to light from
informants on the efficacy of attacks. With
the co-ordination of Visual Control Post teams
and other sources, an even more efficient direc-
tion of fire-power on to targets and better
observation of results will be possible. If
analysed, the plans‘compiled from these sources
would provide valuable proof of the decisive
part that can be played by close support
squadrons properly trained and handled.

Il. Planning.

189. The amount of planning that has been
necessary to bring the campaign to a close has
been large, due in part to some misappreciation
of Japanese intentions and to frustration im-
posed by non-arrival of resources. There was
a tendency also on the part of ground forces
to formulate a plan of operations without
consulting the Air Commander in the early
stages of planning. In consequence, much
effort was expended in the recasting of opera-
tional plans to take advantage of the striking
power of air forces,

190. Much of this could have been avoided
had the Army Commander been able to re-
main alongside the Supreme Commander and
the Allied Air Commander-in-Chief instead
of having to base himself at an Advanced
Headquarters in Calcutta. Not only was
proper liaison at C.-in-C. level impossible, but
the full flow of information and views between
the staffs was rendered difficult. The Burma
campaign proved that no plan of operations
is complete unless it represents the views of
the air as well as of the ground forces at all
stages.

* * * *

III. Maintenance.

191. South East Asia Air Forces have a
background of three years’ development under
trying conditions with insufficient resources.
The organisation became vast and was spread
over a wide area. The first phase for which
this organisation was designed is now com-
pleted ; the flow of supplies has become secure,
and the necessity for tying down large numbers
