1980

notable. The stores areas at Taungup and
Prome were watched and bombed from time
to time.

* * * x

Tactical Support of the Northern Combat Area
Command.

105. On the north-eastern sector of the front,
direct air support to Special Force and later to
Thirty-six Division together with the Chinese
divisions and the American Mars Task Force
further to the east, was provided by the P.47s.,
P.38s. and also by the B.25s. of the Tenth
U.S.A.A.F. The general principles of army/
air force co-operation were as on other sectors
of the front, the Visual Control Post being
known as the “air party”. There were, how-
ever, two directions in which the technique
of close air support as practised by the Tenth
US.A.A.F. was more advanced than on the
221 and 224 Group sectors. The first was in
the more highly developed signals methods
used in R/T communications between the “ air
party” on the one hand and the attacking
aircraft and also the light aircraft—-L.5s.—
used for observation on the other.

106. The second lay in the special use made
in’ the N.C.A.C. area of photography for
tactical operations. Photographs of all sorts
were used—low level verticals, reconnaissance
strips, obliques and pin point shots. A simple
method was worked out by which a common
photograph grid was accepted by both ground
and air forces for marking photographs; this
was all the more necessary in that the country
through which the N.C.A-C. forces were
advancing consisted of an expanse of jungle-
clad hills with few natural features by
teference to which a target could be simply
identified. The effectiveness of close | air
support was acknowledged by the ground forces
in this sector no less than elsewhere, despite
the considerable obstacles offered by the wild
terrain to an exact collaboration.

107. It was no doubt in part the very suc-
cess of air support operations in the N.C.A.C.
area that Jed to their comparatively early
cessation. The country through which the
land forces advanced with a continually grow-
ing momentum offered few or no sites for the
construction of forward landing-grounds, and
the leading army units tended more and more
to draw away from the available air bases
as a consequence. Enemy opposition also
dwindled, and, from the end of March onwards,
contact was lost with the Japanese. Thence-
forward, the air effort was thus inevitably
restricted to long-range attacks upon the
transport routes, supply centres and bivouac
points along the enemy line of retreat through
the Shan States southwards into Siam.

= = * *

Part Six.

STRATEGIC AIR FORCE.

108. Operations by heavy bombers in this
theatre were conditioned by the restricted
nature of the targets available and by the
vulnerability of the all-important Japanese lines
of communication. To understand the pattern
of attack, and to assess its results, demands
some knowledge of these circumstances, which
are discussed in some detail hereunder.

SUPPLEMENT To THE LONDON GAZETTE, 12 APRIL, 1951

109. The factors of climate, topography and
the occupation of large areas of China com-
bined to make the Japanese grip on Burma
one which, it was early realised, the Allies
would have great difficulty in prising loose.
Notwithstanding his seemingly inviolable front,
the enemy possessed an Achilles’ heel in his
poverty of natural resources and his consequent
dependence on seas that he has never actually
controlled. A high percentage of everything
upon which his industry thrives must cross the
sea in crude form to be processed in the home-
land ; thence it must recross the seas to arrive
at the fighting line. From Japan to Burma
the sea lanes stretch for some 4,000 miles, of
which more and more were open to attack by
Allied bombers as strength, experience and air
bases developed. The railways which carried
his supplies thence to the front were at the
mercy of Allied bombers to an even greater
degree.

110. Communications by sea were not dis-
puted during 1942 and much of 1943. dt was
simple to follow the normal channels of com-
merce to the ports of Siam and Malaya in the
east, Singapore in the south, and Mergui,
Tavoy, Ye, Moulmein and Rangoon in the
west. But Japan herself had proved by the
sinking of the “Prince of Wales” and
“Repulse” that control of the sea demands
control of the air above the sea. In her early
victory lay the seeds of her own defeat, for
Allied aircraft disputed with her, and won,
control of the air over all her lines of com-
munication in Burma and Siam.

111. From the nodal ports, the railways of
Burma and Siam constitute a system of strate-
gically connected lines with a total length of
approximately 5,000 miles. From Phnom
Penh, north-west of Saigon, the railway goes
west and north-west through Bangkok, Pegu
and Mandalay, where it forks into two lines
terminating at Lashio and Myitkyina with
branches to Rangoon, Bassein, Kyauk-
padaung, Myingyan and Ye-U. The tactical
importance of all these railheads was reinforced
by their strategic positioning on the lines of
supply. Their function was not only to feed
forward material from Japan, but to shuttle
within the occupied territories the natural re-
sources whose employment would ease the load
on Japanese shipping—rice, tungsten, oil, tin
aid rubber. It has been estimated that at
least 50 per cent. of the Japanese Army’s
requirements in Burma were produced locally.

* * * *

112. In June, 1944, the Strategic Air Force
underwent changes in organisation and com-
position that materially reduced its strength
and effectiveness during the monsoon months.
The Twelfth Bombardment Group, comprising
four squadrons of Mitchells, was transferred
to Third Tactical Air Force, a step for which.
Air Marshal Baldwin had long pressed, and
the Seventh Bombardment Group of four
squadrons of Liberators was diverted to haul
petrol to China. This was considered more
remunerative employment for them than the
conduct of bomber operations under active
monsoon conditions. Strategic Air Force
therefore retained only its British component,
totalling three Liberator and two Wellington
squadrons, excluding the Special Duty and Air
Sea Rescue element. dn consequence of the
